This may be the beginning of a grand adventure. Programming languages
 encompass a huge space to explore and play in. Plenty of room for your own
 creations to share with others or just enjoy yourself. Brilliant computer
 scientists and software engineers have spent entire careers traversing this land
 without ever reaching the end. If this book is your first entry into the country,
 welcome.
 The pages of this book give you a guided tour through some of the world of
 languages. But before we strap on our hiking boots and venture out, we should
 familiarize ourselves with the territory. The chapters in this part introduce you
 to the basic concepts used by programming languages and how they are
 organized.
 We will also get acquainted with Lox, the language we’ll spend the rest of the
 book implementing (twice). Let’s go!
 NEXT CHAPTER: “INTRODUCTION” →
 Hand-cra!ed by Robert Nystrom — © 2015 – 2020
Introduction
 1
 “
 Fairy tales are more than true: not because they
 tell us that dragons exist, but because they tell us
 that dragons can be beaten.
 — Neil Gaiman, Coraline
 ”
 I’m really excited we’re going on this journey together. This is a book on
 implementing interpreters for programming languages. It’s also a book on how
 to design a language worth implementing. It’s the book I wish I had when I first
 started getting into languages, and it’s the book I’ve been writing in my head for
 nearly a decade.
 In these pages, we will walk step by step through two complete interpreters for
 a full-featured language. I assume this is your first foray into languages, so I’ll
 cover each concept and line of code you need to build a complete, usable, fast
 language implementation.
 In order to cram two full implementations inside one book without it turning
 into a doorstop, this text is lighter on theory than others. As we build each piece
 of the system, I will introduce the history and concepts behind it. I’ll try to get
 you familiar with the lingo so that if you ever find yourself in a cocktail party
 full of PL (programming language) researchers, you’ll fit in.
 But we’re mostly going to spend our brain juice getting the language up and
 running. This is not to say theory isn’t important. Being able to reason precisely
 and formally about syntax and semantics is a vital skill when working on a
 language. But, personally, I learn best by doing. It’s hard for me to wade through
 paragraphs full of abstract concepts and really absorb them. But if I’ve coded
 something, run it, and debugged it, then I get it.
 That’s my goal for you. I want you to come away with a solid intuition of how a
 real language lives and breathes. My hope is that when you read other, more
 theoretical books later, the concepts there will firmly stick in your mind,
 adhered to this tangible substrate.
 Why Learn This Stuff?
 1 . 1
 Every introduction to every compiler book seems to have this section. I don’t
 know what it is about programming languages that causes such existential
 doubt. I don’t think ornithology books worry about justifying their existence.
 They assume the reader loves birds and start teaching.
 To my friends and family, sorry I’ve been so
 absent-minded!
 Strangely enough, a situation I have found
 myself in multiple times. You wouldn’t
 believe how much some of them can drink.
 Static type systems in particular require
 rigorous formal reasoning. Hacking on a type
 system has the same feel as proving a
 theorem in mathematics.
 It turns out this is no coincidence. In the
 early half of last century, Haskell Curry and
 William Alvin Howard showed that they are
 two sides of the same coin: the Curry
Howard isomorphism.
But programming languages are a little different. I suppose it is true that the
 odds of any of us creating a broadly successful general-purpose programming
 language are slim. The designers of the world’s widely-used languages could fit
 in a Volkswagen bus, even without putting the pop-top camper up. If joining
 that elite group was the only reason to learn languages, it would be hard to
 justify. Fortunately, it isn’t.
 Little languages are everywhere
 1 . 1 . 1
 For every successful general-purpose language, there are a thousand successful
 niche ones. We used to call them “little languages”, but inflation in the jargon
 economy led today to the name “domain-specific languages”. These are pidgins
 tailor-built to a specific task. Think application scripting languages, template
 engines, markup formats, and configuration files.
 Almost every large software project needs a handful of these. When you can, it’s
 good to reuse an existing one instead of rolling your own. Once you factor in
 documentation, debuggers, editor support, syntax highlighting, and all of the
 other trappings, doing it yourself becomes a tall order.
 But there’s still a good chance you’ll find yourself needing to whip up a parser
 or something when there isn’t an existing library that fits your needs. Even
 when you are reusing some existing implementation, you’ll inevitably end up
 needing to debug and maintain it and poke around in its guts.
 Languages are great exercise
 1 . 1 . 2
 Long distance runners sometimes train with weights strapped to their ankles or
 at high altitudes where the atmosphere is thin. When they later unburden
 themselves, the new relative ease of light limbs and oxygen-rich air enables
 them to run farther and faster.
 Implementing a language is a real test of programming skill. The code is
 complex and performance critical. You must master recursion, dynamic arrays,
 trees, graphs, and hash tables. You probably use hash tables at least in your day
to-day programming, but how well do you really understand them? Well, after
 we’ve crafted our own from scratch, I guarantee you will.
 While I intend to show you that an interpreter isn’t as daunting as you might
 believe, implementing one well is still a challenge. Rise to it, and you’ll come
 away a stronger programmer, and smarter about how you use data structures
 A random selection of some little languages
 you might run into.
and algorithms in your day job.
 1 . 1 . 3
 One more reason
 This last reason is hard for me to admit, because it’s so close to my heart. Ever
 since I learned to program as a kid, I felt there was something magical about
 languages. When I first tapped out BASIC programs one key at a time I couldn’t
 conceive how BASIC itself was made.
 Later, the mixture of awe and terror on my college friends’ faces when talking
 about their compilers class was enough to convince me language hackers were a
 different breed of human—some sort of wizards granted privileged access to
 arcane arts.
 It’s a charming image, but it has a darker side. I didn’t feel like a wizard, so I was
 left thinking I lacked some in-born quality necessary to join the cabal. Though
 I’ve been fascinated by languages ever since I doodled made up keywords in my
 school notebook, it took me decades to muster the courage to try to really learn
 them. That “magical” quality, that sense of exclusivity, excluded me.
 When I did finally start cobbling together my own little interpreters, I quickly
 learned that, of course, there is no magic at all. It’s just code, and the people who
 hack on languages are just people.
 There are a few techniques you don’t often encounter outside of languages, and
 some parts are a little difficult. But not more difficult than other obstacles
 you’ve overcome. My hope is that if you’ve felt intimidated by languages, and
 this book helps you overcome that fear, maybe I’ll leave you just a tiny bit braver
 than you were before.
 And, who knows, maybe you will make the next great language. Someone has to.
 How the Book is Organized
 This book is broken into three parts. You’re reading the first one now. It’s a
 couple of chapters to get you oriented, teach you some of the lingo that
 language hackers use, and introduce you to Lox, the language we’ll be
 implementing.
 1 . 2
 Each of the other two parts builds one complete Lox interpreter. Within those
 parts, each chapter is structured the same way. The chapter takes a single
 language feature, teaches you the concepts behind it, and walks through an
 implementation.
 It took a good bit of trial and error on my part, but I managed to carve up the
 two interpreters into chapter-sized chunks that build on the previous chapters
 but require nothing from later ones. From the very first chapter, you’ll have a
 working program you can run and play with. With each passing chapter, it
 grows increasingly full-featured until you eventually have a complete language.
 And one its practitioners don’t hesitate to
 play up. Two of the seminal texts on
 programming languages feature a dragon and
 a wizard on their cover.
Aside from copious, scintillating English prose, chapters have a few other
 delightful facets:
 The code
 1 . 2 . 1
 We’re about crafting interpreters, so this book contains real code. Every single
 line of code needed is included, and each snippet tells you where to insert it in
 your ever-growing implementation.
 Many other language books and language implementations use tools like Lex
 and Yacc, so-called compiler-compilers that automatically generate some of
 the source files for an implementation from some higher level description.
 There are pros and cons to tools like those, and strong opinions—some might
 say religious convictions—on both sides.
 We will abstain from using them here. I want to ensure there are no dark
 corners where magic and confusion can hide, so we’ll write everything by hand.
 As you’ll see, it’s not as bad as it sounds and it means you really will understand
 each line of code and how both interpreters work.
 A book has different constraints from the “real world” and so the coding style
 here might not always reflect the best way to write maintainable production
 software. If I seem a little cavalier about, say, omitting private or declaring a
 global variable, understand I do so to keep the code easier on your eyes. The
 pages here aren’t as wide as your IDE and every character counts.
 Also, the code doesn’t have many comments. That’s because each handful of
 lines is surrounded by several paragraphs of honest-to-God prose explaining it.
 When you write a book to accompany your program, you are welcome to omit
 comments too. Otherwise, you should probably use // a little more than I do.
 While the book contains every line of code and teaches what each means, it does
 not describe the machinery needed to compile and run the interpreter. I assume
 you can slap together a makefile or a project in your IDE of choice in order to
 get the code to run. Those kinds of instructions get out of date quickly, and I
 want this book to age like XO brandy, not backyard hooch.
 Snippets
 1 . 2 . 2
 Since the book contains literally every line of code needed for the
 implementations, the snippets are quite precise. Also, because I try to keep the
 program in a runnable state even when major features are missing, sometimes
 we add temporary code that gets replaced in later snippets.
 A snippet with all the bells and whistles looks like this:
      default:
 if (isDigit(c)) {
 number();
 Yacc is a tool that takes in a grammar file and
 produces a source file for a compiler, so it’s
 sort of like a “compiler” that outputs a
 compiler, which is where we get the term
 “compiler-compiler”.
 Yacc wasn’t the first of its ilk, which is why
 it’s named “Yacc”—Yet Another Compiler
Compiler. A later similar tool is Bison, named
 as a pun on the pronunciation of Yacc like
 “yak”.
 If you find all of these little self-references
 and puns charming and fun, you’ll fit right in
 here. If not, well, maybe the language nerd
 sense of humor is an acquired taste.
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
        } 
else {
 replace 1 line
 Lox.error(line, "Unexpected character.");
        }
        break;
 In the center, you have the new code to add. It may have a few faded out lines
 above or below to show where it goes in the existing surrounding code. There is
 also a little blurb telling you in which file and where to place the snippet. If that
 blurb says “replace _ lines”, there is some existing code between the faded lines
 that you need to remove and replace with the new snippet.
 Asides
 1 . 2 . 3
 Asides contain biographical sketches, historical background, references to
 related topics, and suggestions of other areas to explore. There’s nothing that
 you need to know in them to understand later parts of the book, so you can skip
 them if you want. I won’t judge you, but I might be a little sad.
 Challenges
 1 . 2 . 4
 Each chapter ends with a few exercises. Unlike textbook problem sets which
 tend to review material you already covered, these are to help you learn more
 than what’s in the chapter. They force you to step off the guided path and
 explore on your own. They will make you research other languages, figure out
 how to implement features, or otherwise get you out of your comfort zone.
 Vanquish the challenges and you’ll come away with a broader understanding
 and possibly a few bumps and scrapes. Or skip them if you want to stay inside
 the comfy confines of the tour bus. It’s your book.
 Design notes
 1 . 2 . 5
 Most “programming language” books are strictly programming language
 implementation books. They rarely discuss how one might happen to design the
 language being implemented. Implementation is fun because it is so precisely
 defined. We programmers seem to have an affinity for things that are black and
 white, ones and zeroes.
 Personally, I think the world only needs so many implementations of
 FORTRAN 77. At some point, you find yourself designing a new language. Once
 you start playing that game, then the softer, human side of the equation becomes
 paramount. Things like what features are easy to learn, how to balance
 innovation and familiarity, what syntax is more readable and to whom.
 All of that stuff profoundly affects the success of your new language. I want
 your language to succeed, so in some chapters I end with a “design note”, a little
 essay on some corner of the human aspect of programming languages. I’m no
 Well, some asides do, at least. Most of them
 are just dumb jokes and amateurish drawings.
 A word of warning: the challenges often ask
 you to make changes to the interpreter you’re
 building. You’ll want to implement those in a
 copy of your code. The later chapters assume
 your interpreter is in a pristine
 (“unchallenged”?) state.
 I know a lot of language hackers whose
 careers are based on this. You slide a language
 spec under their door, wait a few months,
 and code and benchmark results come out.
 Hopefully your new language doesn’t
 hardcode assumptions about the width of a
 punched card into its grammar.
expert on this—I don’t know if anyone really is—so take these with a large
 pinch of salt. That should make them tastier food for thought, which is my main
 aim.
 The First Interpreter
 1 . 3
 We’ll write our first interpreter, jlox, in Java. The focus is on concepts. We’ll write
 the simplest, cleanest code we can to correctly implement the semantics of the
 language. This will get us comfortable with the basic techniques and also hone
 our understanding of exactly how the language is supposed to behave.
 Java is a great language for this. It’s high level enough that we don’t get
 overwhelmed by fiddly implementation details, but it’s still pretty explicit.
 Unlike scripting languages, there tends to be less complex machinery hiding
 under the hood, and you’ve got static types to see what data structures you’re
 working with.
 I also chose Java specifically because it is an object-oriented language. That
 paradigm swept the programming world in the 90s and is now the dominant
 way of thinking for millions of programmers. Odds are good you’re already
 used to organizing code into classes and methods, so we’ll keep you in that
 comfort zone.
 While academic language folks sometimes look down on object-oriented
 languages, the reality is that they are widely used even for language work. GCC
 and LLVM are written in C++, as are most JavaScript virtual machines. Object
oriented languages are ubiquitous and the tools and compilers for a language are
 often written in the same language.
 And, finally, Java is hugely popular. That means there’s a good chance you
 already know it, so there’s less for you to learn to get going in the book. If you
 aren’t that familiar with Java, don’t freak out. I try to stick to a fairly minimal
 subset of it. I use the diamond operator from Java 7 to make things a little more
 terse, but that’s about it as far as “advanced” features go. If you know another
 object-oriented language like C# or C++, you can muddle through.
 By the end of part II, we’ll have a simple, readable implementation. What we
 won’t have is a fast one. It also takes advantage of the Java virtual machine’s own
 runtime facilities. We want to learn how Java itself implements those things.
 The Second Interpreter
 1 . 4
 So in the next part, we start all over again, but this time in C. C is the perfect
 language for understanding how an implementation really works, all the way
 down to the bytes in memory and the code flowing through the CPU.
 A big reason that we’re using C is so I can show you things C is particularly
 good at, but that does mean you’ll need to be pretty comfortable with it. You
 don’t have to be the reincarnation of Dennis Ritchie, but you shouldn’t be
 A compiler reads files in one language.
 translates them, and outputs files in another
 language. You can implement a compiler in
 any language, including the same language it
 compiles, a process called “self-hosting”.
 You can’t compile your compiler using itself
 yet, but if you have another compiler for your
 language written in some other language, you
 use that one to compile your compiler once.
 Now you can use the compiled version of
 your own compiler to compile future
 versions of itself and you can discard the
 original one compiled from the other
 compiler. This is called “bootstrapping” from
 the image of pulling yourself up by your own
 bootstraps.
spooked by pointers either.
 If you aren’t there yet, pick up an introductory book on C and chew through it,
 then come back here when you’re done. In return, you’ll come away from this
 book an even stronger C programmer. That’s useful given how many language
 implementations are written in C: Lua, CPython, and Ruby’s MRI, to name a
 few.
 In our C interpreter, clox, we are forced to implement for ourselves all the
 things Java gave us for free. We’ll write our own dynamic array and hash table.
 We’ll decide how objects are represented in memory, and build a garbage
 collector to reclaim it.
 Our Java implementation was focused on being correct. Now that we have that
 down, we’ll turn to also being fast. Our C interpreter will contain a compiler
 that translates Lox to an efficient bytecode representation (don’t worry, I’ll get
 into what that means soon) which it then executes. This is the same technique
 used by implementations of Lua, Python, Ruby, PHP, and many other successful
 languages.
 We’ll even try our hand at benchmarking and optimization. By the end, we’ll
 have a robust, accurate, fast interpreter for our language, able to keep up with
 other professional caliber implementations out there. Not bad for one book and
 a few thousand lines of code.
 CHALLENGES
 1. 
2. 
3. 
There are at least six domain-specific languages used in the little system I cobbled
 together to write and publish this book. What are they?
 Get a “Hello, world!” program written and running in Java. Set up whatever
 Makefiles or IDE projects you need to get it working. If you have a debugger, get
 comfortable with it and step through your program as it runs.
 Do the same thing for C. To get some practice with pointers, define a doubly-linked
 list of heap-allocated strings. Write functions to insert, find, and delete items from
 it. Test them.
 DESIGN NOTE: WHAT’S IN A NAME?
 One of the hardest challenges in writing this book was coming up with a name for the
 language it implements. I went through pages of candidates before I found one that
 worked. As you’ll discover on the first day you start building your own language,
 naming is deviously hard. A good name satisfies a few criteria:
 1. 
2. 
It isn’t in use. You can run into all sorts of trouble, legal and social, if you
 inadvertently step on someone else’s name.
 It’s easy to pronounce. If things go well, hordes of people will be saying and
 writing your language’s name. Anything longer than a couple of syllables or a
 handful of letters will annoy them to no end.
 I pronounce the name like “sea-locks”, but
 you can say it “clocks” or even “clochs”, where
 you pronounce the “x” like the Greeks do if it
 makes you happy.
 Did you think this was just an interpreters
 book? It’s a compiler book as well. Two for
 the price of one!
3. 
4. 
It’s distinct enough to search for. People will Google your language’s name to
 learn about it, so you want a word that’s rare enough that most results point to
 your docs. Though, with the amount of AI search engines are packing today, that’s
 less of an issue. Still, you won’t be doing your users any favors if you name your
 language “for”.
 It doesn’t have negative connotations across a number of cultures. This is hard to
 guard for, but it’s worth considering. The designer of Nimrod ended up renaming
 his language to “Nim” because too many people only remember that Bugs Bunny
 used “Nimrod” (ironically, actually) as an insult.
 If your potential name makes it through that gauntlet, keep it. Don’t get hung up on
 trying to find an appellation that captures the quintessence of your language. If the
 names of the world’s other successful languages teach us anything, it’s that the name
 doesn’t matter much. All you need is a reasonably unique token.
 NEXT CHAPTER: “A MAP OF THE TERRITORY” →
 Hand-cra!ed by Robert Nystrom — © 2015 – 2020
2
 A Map of the Territory
 “ ”
 You must have a map, no matter how rough.
 Otherwise you wander all over the place. In “The
 Lord of the Rings” I never made anyone go
 farther than he could on a given day.
 — J.R.R. Tolkien
 We don’t want to wander all over the place, so before we set off, let’s scan the
 territory charted by previous language implementers. It will help us understand
 where we are going and alternate routes others take.
 First, let me establish a shorthand. Much of this book is about a language’s
 implementation, which is distinct from the language itself in some sort of Platonic
 ideal form. Things like “stack”, “bytecode”, and “recursive descent”, are nuts and
 bolts one particular implementation might use. From the user’s perspective, as
 long as the resulting contraption faithfully follows the language’s specification,
 it’s all implementation detail.
 We’re going to spend a lot of time on those details, so if I have to write
 “language implementation” every single time I mention them, I’ll wear my fingers
 off. Instead, I’ll use “language” to refer to either a language or an
 implementation of it, or both, unless the distinction matters.
 The Parts of a Language
 2 . 1
 Engineers have been building programming languages since the Dark Ages of
 computing. As soon as we could talk to computers, we discovered doing so was
 too hard, and we enlisted their help. I find it fascinating that even though
 today’s machines are literally a million times faster and have orders of
 magnitude more storage, the way we build programming languages is virtually
 unchanged.
 Though the area explored by language designers is vast, the trails they’ve carved
 through it are few. Not every language takes the exact same path—some take a
 shortcut or two—but otherwise they are reassuringly similar from Rear
 Admiral Grace Hopper’s first COBOL compiler all the way to some hot new
 transpile-to-JavaScript language whose “documentation” consists entirely of a
 single poorly-edited README in a Git repository somewhere.
 There are certainly dead ends, sad little cul
de-sacs of CS papers with zero citations and
 now-forgotten optimizations that only made
 sense when memory was measured in
 individual bytes.
 I visualize the network of paths an implementation may choose as climbing a
mountain. You start off at the bottom with the program as raw source text,
 literally just a string of characters. Each phase analyzes the program and
 transforms it to some higher-level representation where the semantics—what
 the author wants the computer to do—becomes more apparent.
 Eventually we reach the peak. We have a bird’s-eye view of the users’s program
 and can see what their code means. We begin our descent down the other side of
 the mountain. We transform this highest-level representation down to
 successively lower-level forms to get closer and closer to something we know
 how to make the CPU actually execute.
 Let’s trace through each of those trails and points of interest. Our journey
 begins on the left with the bare text of the user’s source code:
 Scanning
 2 . 1 . 1
 The first step is scanning, also known as lexing, or (if you’re trying to impress
 someone) lexical analysis. They all mean pretty much the same thing. I like
 “lexing” because it sounds like something an evil supervillain would do, but I’ll
 use “scanning” because it seems to be marginally more commonplace.
 A scanner (or lexer) takes in the linear stream of characters and chunks them
 together into a series of something more akin to “words”. In programming
 languages, each of these words is called a token. Some tokens are single
 characters, like ( and ,. Others may be several characters long, like numbers
 ( 123), string literals ("hi!"), and identifiers (min).
 Some characters in a source file don’t actually mean anything. Whitespace is
 often insignificant and comments, by definition, are ignored by the language.
 The scanner usually discards these, leaving a clean sequence of meaningful
 “Lexical” comes from the Greek root “lex”,
 meaning “word”.
tokens.
 Parsing
 2 . 1 . 2
 The next step is parsing. This is where our syntax gets a grammar—the ability
 to compose larger expressions and statements out of smaller parts. Did you ever
 diagram sentences in English class? If so, you’ve done what a parser does, except
 that English has thousands and thousands of “keywords” and an overflowing
 cornucopia of ambiguity. Programming languages are much simpler.
 A parser takes the flat sequence of tokens and builds a tree structure that
 mirrors the nested nature of the grammar. These trees have a couple of different
 names—“parse tree” or “abstract syntax tree”—depending on how close to the
 bare syntactic structure of the source language they are. In practice, language
 hackers usually call them “syntax trees”, “ASTs”, or often just “trees”.
 Parsing has a long, rich history in computer science that is closely tied to the
 artificial intelligence community. Many of the techniques used today to parse
 programming languages were originally conceived to parse human languages by
 AI researchers who were trying to get computers to talk to us.
 It turns out human languages are too messy for the rigid grammars those
 parsers could handle, but they were a perfect fit for the simpler artificial
 grammars of programming languages. Alas, we flawed humans still manage to
 use those simple grammars incorrectly, so the parser’s job also includes letting
 us know when we do by reporting syntax errors.
 Static analysis
 2 . 1 . 3
 The first two stages are pretty similar across all implementations. Now, the
 individual characteristics of each language start coming into play. At this point,
 we know the syntactic structure of the code—things like which expressions are
 nested in which others—but we don’t know much more than that.
 In an expression like a + b, we know we are adding a and b, but we don’t
 know what those names refer to. Are they local variables? Global? Where are
 they defined?
The first bit of analysis that most languages do is called binding or resolution.
 For each identifier we find out where that name is defined and wire the two
 together. This is where scope comes into play—the region of source code
 where a certain name can be used to refer to a certain declaration.
 If the language is statically typed, this is when we type check. Once we know
 where a and b are declared, we can also figure out their types. Then if those
 types don’t support being added to each other, we report a type error.
 Take a deep breath. We have attained the summit of the mountain and a
 sweeping view of the user’s program. All this semantic insight that is visible to
 us from analysis needs to be stored somewhere. There are a few places we can
 squirrel it away:
 Often, it gets stored right back as attributes on the syntax tree itself—extra
 fields in the nodes that aren’t initialized during parsing but get filled in later.
 Other times, we may store data in a look-up table off to the side. Typically,
 the keys to this table are identifiers—names of variables and declarations. In
 that case, we call it a symbol table and the values it associates with each key
 tell us what that identifier refers to.
 The most powerful bookkeeping tool is to transform the tree into an entirely
 new data structure that more directly expresses the semantics of the code.
 That’s the next section.
 Everything up to this point is considered the front end of the implementation.
 You might guess everything after this is the back end, but no. Back in the days
 of yore when “front end” and “back end” were coined, compilers were much
 simpler. Later researchers invented new phases to stuff between the two halves.
 Rather than discard the old terms, William Wulf and company lumped them
 into the charming but spatially paradoxical name middle end.
 Intermediate representations
 2 . 1 . 4
 You can think of the compiler as a pipeline where each stage’s job is to organize
 the data representing the user’s code in a way that makes the next stage simpler
 to implement. The front end of the pipeline is specific to the source language
 the program is written in. The back end is concerned with the final architecture
 where the program will run.
 In the middle, the code may be stored in some intermediate representation (or
 IR) that isn’t tightly tied to either the source or destination forms (hence
 “intermediate”). Instead, the IR acts as an interface between these two languages.
 This lets you support multiple source languages and target platforms with less
 effort. Say you want to implement Pascal, C and Fortran compilers and you
 want to target x86, ARM, and, I dunno, SPARC. Normally, that means you’re
 signing up to write nine full compilers: Pascal→x86, C→ARM, and every other
 combination.
 The language we’ll build in this book is
 dynamically typed, so it will do its type
 checking later, at runtime.
 There are a few well-established styles of IRs
 out there. Hit your search engine of choice
 and look for “control flow graph”, “static
 single-assignment”, “continuation-passing
 style”, and “three-address code”.
A shared intermediate representation reduces that dramatically. You write one
 front end for each source language that produces the IR. Then one back end for
 each target architecture. Now you can mix and match those to get every
 combination.
 There’s another big reason we might want to transform the code into a form
 that makes the semantics more apparent…
 Optimization
 2 . 1 . 5
 Once we understand what the user’s program means, we are free to swap it out
 with a different program that has the same semantics but implements them more
 efficiently—we can optimize it.
 A simple example is constant folding: if some expression always evaluates to
 the exact same value, we can do the evaluation at compile time and replace the
 code for the expression with its result. If the user typed in:
 pennyArea = 3.14159 * (0.75 / 2) * (0.75 / 2);
 We can do all of that arithmetic in the compiler and change the code to:
 pennyArea = 0.4417860938;
 Optimization is a huge part of the programming language business. Many
 language hackers spend their entire careers here, squeezing every drop of
 performance they can out of their compilers to get their benchmarks a fraction
 of a percent faster. It can become a sort of obsession.
 We’re mostly going to hop over that rathole in this book. Many successful
 languages have surprisingly few compile-time optimizations. For example, Lua
 and CPython generate relatively unoptimized code, and focus most of their
 performance effort on the runtime.
 Code generation
 2 . 1 . 6
 We have applied all of the optimizations we can think of to the user’s program.
 The last step is converting it to a form the machine can actually run. In other
 words generating code (or code gen), where “code” here usually refers to the
 kind of primitive assembly-like instructions a CPU runs and not the kind of
 “source code” a human might want to read.
 Finally, we are in the back end, descending the other side of the mountain.
 From here on out, our representation of the code becomes more and more
 primitive, like evolution run in reverse, as we get closer to something our
 simple-minded machine can understand.
 If you’ve ever wondered how GCC supports
 so many crazy languages and architectures,
 like Modula-3 on Motorola 68k, now you
 know. Language front ends target one of a
 handful of IRs, mainly GIMPLE and RTL.
 Target backends like the one for 68k then
 take those IRs and produce native code.
 If you can’t resist poking your foot into that
 hole, some keywords to get you started are
 “constant propagation”, “common
 subexpression elimination”, “loop invariant
 code motion”, “global value numbering”,
 “strength reduction”, “scalar replacement of
 aggregates”, “dead code elimination”, and
 “loop unrolling”.
We have a decision to make. Do we generate instructions for a real CPU or a
 virtual one? If we generate real machine code, we get an executable that the OS
 can load directly onto the chip. Native code is lightning fast, but generating it is
 a lot of work. Today’s architectures have piles of instructions, complex
 pipelines, and enough historical baggage to fill a 747’s luggage bay.
 Speaking the chip’s language also means your compiler is tied to a specific
 architecture. If your compiler targets x86 machine code, it’s not going to run on
 an ARM device. All the way back in the 60s, during the Cambrian explosion of
 computer architectures, that lack of portability was a real obstacle.
 To get around that, hackers like Martin Richards and Niklaus Wirth, of BCPL
 and Pascal fame, respectively, made their compilers produce virtual machine
 code. Instead of instructions for some real chip, they produced code for a
 hypothetical, idealized machine. Wirth called this “p-code” for “portable”, but
 today, we generally call it bytecode because each instruction is often a single
 byte long.
 These synthetic instructions are designed to map a little more closely to the
 language’s semantics, and not be so tied to the peculiarities of any one computer
 architecture and its accumulated historical cruft. You can think of it like a
 dense, binary encoding of the language’s low-level operations.
 Virtual machine
 2 . 1 . 7
 If your compiler produces bytecode, your work isn’t over once that’s done.
 Since there is no chip that speaks that bytecode, it’s your job to translate. Again,
 you have two options. You can write a little mini-compiler for each target
 architecture that converts the bytecode to native code for that machine. You still
 have to do work for each chip you support, but this last stage is pretty simple
 and you get to reuse the rest of the compiler pipeline across all of the machines
 you support. You’re basically using your bytecode as an intermediate
 representation.
 Or you can write a virtual machine (VM), a program that emulates a
 hypothetical chip supporting your virtual architecture at runtime. Running
 bytecode in a VM is slower than translating it to native code ahead of time
 because every instruction must be simulated at runtime each time it executes. In
 return, you get simplicity and portability. Implement your VM in, say, C, and
 you can run your language on any platform that has a C compiler. This is how
 the second interpreter we build in this book works.
 Runtime
 2 . 1 . 8
 We have finally hammered the user’s program into a form that we can execute.
 The last step is running it. If we compiled it to machine code, we simply tell the
 operating system to load the executable and off it goes. If we compiled it to
 bytecode, we need to start up the VM and load the program into that.
 For example, the AAD (“ASCII Adjust AX
 Before Division”) instruction lets you
 perform division, which sounds useful.
 Except that instruction takes as operands two
 binary-coded decimal digits packed into a
 single 16-bit register. When was the last time
 you needed BCD on a 16-bit machine?
 The basic principle here is that the farther
 down the pipeline you push the architecture
specific work, the more of the earlier phases
 you can share across architectures.
 There is a tension, though. Many
 optimizations, like register allocation and
 instruction selection, work best when they
 know the strengths and capabilities of a
 specific chip. Figuring out which parts of
 your compiler can be shared and which
 should be target-specific is an art.
 The term “virtual machine” also refers to a
 different kind of abstraction. A system
 virtual machine emulates an entire
 hardware platform and operating system in
 software. This is how you can play Windows
 games on your Linux machine, and how
 cloud providers give customers the user
 experience of controlling their own “server”
 without needing to physically allocate
 separate computers for each user.
 The kind of VMs we’ll talk about in this book
 are language virtual machines or process
 virtual machines if you want to be
 unambiguous.
In both cases, for all but the basest of low-level languages, we usually need some
 services that our language provides while the program is running. For example,
 if the language automatically manages memory, we need a garbage collector
 going in order to reclaim unused bits. If our language supports “instance of”
 tests so you can see what kind of object you have, then we need some
 representation to keep track of the type of each object during execution.
 All of this stuff is going at runtime, so it’s called, appropriately, the runtime. In
 a fully compiled language, the code implementing the runtime gets inserted
 directly into the resulting executable. In, say, Go, each compiled application has
 its own copy of Go’s runtime directly embedded in it. If the language is run
 inside an interpreter or VM, then the runtime lives there. This is how most
 implementations of languages like Java, Python, and JavaScript work.
 Shortcuts and Alternate Routes
 2 . 2
 That’s the long path covering every possible phase you might implement. Many
 languages do walk the entire route, but there are a few shortcuts and alternate
 paths.
 Single-pass compilers
 2 . 2 . 1
 Some simple compilers interleave parsing, analysis, and code generation so that
 they produce output code directly in the parser, without ever allocating any
 syntax trees or other IRs. These single-pass compilers restrict the design of the
 language. You have no intermediate data structures to store global information
 about the program, and you don’t revisit any previously parsed part of the code.
 That means as soon as you see some expression, you need to know enough to
 correctly compile it.
 Pascal and C were designed around this limitation. At the time, memory was so
 precious that a compiler might not even be able to hold an entire source file in
 memory, much less the whole program. This is why Pascal’s grammar requires
 type declarations to appear first in a block. It’s why in C you can’t call a function
 above the code that defines it unless you have an explicit forward declaration
 that tells the compiler what it needs to know to generate code for a call to the
 later function.
 Tree-walk interpreters
 2 . 2 . 2
 Some programming languages begin executing code right after parsing it to an
 AST (with maybe a bit of static analysis applied). To run the program, the
 interpreter traverses the syntax tree one branch and leaf at a time, evaluating
 each node as it goes.
 This implementation style is common for student projects and little languages,
 but is not widely used for general-purpose languages since it tends to be slow.
 Syntax-directed translation is a structured
 technique for building these all-at-once
 compilers. You associate an action with each
 piece of the grammar, usually one that
 generates output code. Then, whenever the
 parser matches that chunk of syntax, it
 executes the action, building up the target
 code one rule at a time.
Some people use “interpreter” to mean only these kinds of implementations, but
 others define that word more generally, so I’ll use the inarguably explicit “tree
walk interpreter” to refer to these. Our first interpreter rolls this way.
 Transpilers
 2 . 2 . 3
 Writing a complete back end for a language can be a lot of work. If you have
 some existing generic IR to target, you could bolt your front end onto that.
 Otherwise, it seems like you’re stuck. But what if you treated some other source
 language as if it were an intermediate representation?
 You write a front end for your language. Then, in the back end, instead of doing
 all the work to lower the semantics to some primitive target language, you
 produce a string of valid source code for some other language that’s about as
 high level as yours. Then, you use the existing compilation tools for that
 language as your escape route off the mountain and down to something you can
 execute.
 They used to call this a source-to-source compiler or a transcompiler. After
 the rise of languages that compile to JavaScript in order to run in the browser,
 they’ve affected the hipster sobriquet transpiler.
 While the first transcompiler translated one assembly language to another,
 today, most transpilers work on higher-level languages. After the viral spread of
 UNIX to machines various and sundry, there began a long tradition of
 compilers that produced C as their output language. C compilers were available
 everywhere UNIX was and produced efficient code, so targeting C was a good
 way to get your language running on a lot of architectures.
 Web browsers are the “machines” of today, and their “machine code” is
 JavaScript, so these days it seems almost every language out there has a compiler
 that targets JS since that’s the main way to get your code running in a browser.
 The front end—scanner and parser—of a transpiler looks like other compilers.
 Then, if the source language is only a simple syntactic skin over the target
 language, it may skip analysis entirely and go straight to outputting the
 analogous syntax in the destination language.
 If the two languages are more semantically different, then you’ll see more of the
 typical phases of a full compiler including analysis and possibly even
 optimization. Then, when it comes to code generation, instead of outputting
 some binary language like machine code, you produce a string of grammatically
 correct source (well, destination) code in the target language.
 Either way, you then run that resulting code through the output language’s
 existing compilation pipeline and you’re good to go.
 Just-in-time compilation
 A notable exception is early versions of Ruby,
 which were tree walkers. At 1.9, the canonical
 implementation of Ruby switched from the
 original MRI (“Matz’ Ruby Interpreter”) to
 Koichi Sasada’s YARV (“Yet Another Ruby
 VM”). YARV is a bytecode virtual machine.
 The first transcompiler, XLT86, translated
 8080 assembly into 8086 assembly. That
 might seem straightforward, but keep in
 mind the 8080 was an 8-bit chip and the
 8086 a 16-bit chip that could use each
 register as a pair of 8-bit ones. XLT86 did
 data flow analysis to track register usage in
 the source program and then efficiently map
 it to the register set of the 8086.
 It was written by Gary Kildall, a tragic hero
 of computer science if there ever was one.
 One of the first people to recognize the
 promise of microcomputers, he created
 PL/M and CP/M, the first high level
 language and OS for them.
 He was a sea captain, business owner,
 licensed pilot, and motorcyclist. A TV host
 with the Kris Kristofferson-esque look
 sported by dashing bearded dudes in the 80s.
 He took on Bill Gates and, like many, lost,
 before meeting his end in a biker bar under
 mysterious circumstances. He died too
 young, but sure as hell lived before he did.
 JS used to be the only way to execute code in a
 browser. Thanks to Web Assembly, compilers
 now have a second, lower-level language they
 can target that runs on the web.
 2 . 2 . 4
This last one is less of a shortcut and more a dangerous alpine scramble best
 reserved for experts. The fastest way to execute code is by compiling it to
 machine code, but you might not know what architecture your end user’s
 machine supports. What to do?
 You can do the same thing that the HotSpot JVM, Microsoft’s CLR and most
 JavaScript interpreters do. On the end user’s machine, when the program is
 loaded—either from source in the case of JS, or platform-independent bytecode
 for the JVM and CLR—you compile it to native for the architecture their
 computer supports. Naturally enough, this is called just-in-time compilation.
 Most hackers just say “JIT”, pronounced like it rhymes with “fit”.
 The most sophisticated JITs insert profiling hooks into the generated code to
 see which regions are most performance critical and what kind of data is
 flowing through them. Then, over time, they will automatically recompile those
 hot spots with more advanced optimizations.
 Compilers and Interpreters
 2 . 3
 Now that I’ve stuffed your head with a dictionary’s worth of programming
 language jargon, we can finally address a question that’s plagued coders since
 time immemorial: “What’s the difference between a compiler and an
 interpreter?”
 It turns out this is like asking the difference between a fruit and a vegetable.
 That seems like a binary either-or choice, but actually “fruit” is a botanical term
 and “vegetable” is culinary. One does not strictly imply the negation of the other.
 There are fruits that aren’t vegetables (apples) and vegetables that are not fruits
 (carrots), but also edible plants that are both fruits and vegetables, like tomatoes.
 So, back to languages:
 Compiling is an implementation technique that involves translating a source
 language to some other—usually lower-level—form. When you generate
 bytecode or machine code, you are compiling. When you transpile to
 This is, of course, exactly where the HotSpot
 JVM gets its name.
 Peanuts (which are not even nuts) and cereals
 like wheat are actually fruit, but I got this
 drawing wrong. What can I say, I’m a
 software engineer, not a botanist. I should
 probably erase the little peanut guy, but he’s
 so cute that I can’t bear to.
 Now pine nuts, on the other hand, are plant
based foods that are neither fruits nor
 vegetables. At least as far as I can tell.
another high-level language you are compiling too.
 When we say a language implementation “is a compiler”, we mean it
 translates source code to some other form but doesn’t execute it. The user
 has to take the resulting output and run it themselves.
 Conversely, when we say an implementation “is an interpreter”, we mean it
 takes in source code and executes it immediately. It runs programs “from
 source”.
 Like apples and oranges, some implementations are clearly compilers and not
 interpreters. GCC and Clang take your C code and compile it to machine code.
 An end user runs that executable directly and may never even know which tool
 was used to compile it. So those are compilers for C.
 In older versions of Matz’ canonical implementation of Ruby, the user ran Ruby
 from source. The implementation parsed it and executed it directly by
 traversing the syntax tree. No other translation occurred, either internally or in
 any user-visible form. So this was definitely an interpreter for Ruby.
 But what of CPython? When you run your Python program using it, the code is
 parsed and converted to an internal bytecode format, which is then executed
 inside the VM. From the user’s perspective, this is clearly an interpreter—they
 run their program from source. But if you look under CPython’s scaly skin,
 you’ll see that there is definitely some compiling going on.
 The answer is that it is both. CPython is an interpreter, and it has a compiler. In
 practice, most scripting languages work this way, as you can see:
 That overlapping region in the center is where our second interpreter lives too,
 since it internally compiles to bytecode. So while this book is nominally about
 interpreters, we’ll cover some compilation too.
 Our Journey
 2 . 4
 The Go tool is even more of a horticultural
 curiosity. If you run go build, it compiles
 your Go source code to machine code and
 stops. If you type go run, it does that then
 immediately executes the generated
 executable.
 So go is a compiler (you can use it as a tool to
 compile code without running it), is an
 interpreter (you can invoke it to immediately
 run a program from source), and also has a
 compiler (when you use it as an interpreter, it
 is still compiling internally).
 That’s a lot to take in all at once. Don’t worry. This isn’t the chapter where
you’re expected to understand all of these pieces and parts. I just want you to
 know that they are out there and roughly how they fit together.
 This map should serve you well as you explore the territory beyond the guided
 path we take in this book. I want to leave you yearning to strike out on your
 own and wander all over that mountain.
 But, for now, it’s time for our own journey to begin. Tighten your bootlaces,
 cinch up your pack, and come along. From here on out, all you need to focus on
 is the path in front of you.
 CHALLENGES
 1. 
2. 
3. 
Pick an open source implementation of a language you like. Download the source
 code and poke around in it. Try to find the code that implements the scanner and
 parser. Are they hand-written, or generated using tools like Lex and Yacc? (.l or
 .y files usually imply the latter.)
 Just-in-time compilation tends to be the fastest way to implement a dynamically
typed language, but not all of them use it. What reasons are there to not JIT?
 Most Lisp implementations that compile to C also contain an interpreter that lets
 them execute Lisp code on the fly as well. Why?
 NEXT CHAPTER: “THE LOX LANGUAGE” →
 Hand-cra!ed by Robert Nystrom — © 2015 – 2020
 Henceforth, I promise to tone down the
 whole mountain metaphor thing.
3
 The Lox Language
 What nicer thing can you do for somebody than
 make them breakfast?
 “ ”
 — Anthony Bourdain
 We’ll spend the rest of this book illuminating every dark and sundry corner of
 the Lox language, but it seems cruel to have you immediately start grinding out
 code for the interpreter without at least a glimpse of what we’re going to end up
 with.
 At the same time, I don’t want to drag you through reams of language lawyering
 and specification-ese before you get to touch your text editor. So this will be a
 gentle, friendly introduction to Lox. It will leave out a lot of details and edge
 cases. We’ve got plenty of time for those later.
 Hello, Lox
 Here’s your very first taste of Lox:
 // Your first Lox program!
 print "Hello, world!";
 3 . 1
 As that // line comment and the trailing semicolon imply, Lox’s syntax is a
 member of the C family. (There are no parentheses around the string because
 print is a built-in statement, and not a library function.)
 Now, I won’t claim that C has a great syntax. If we wanted something elegant,
 we’d probably mimic Pascal or Smalltalk. If we wanted to go full Scandinavian
furniture-minimalism, we’d do a Scheme. Those all have their virtues.
 What C-like syntax has instead is something you’ll find is often more valuable
 in a language: familiarity. I know you are already comfortable with that style
 because the two languages we’ll be using to implement Lox—Java and C—also
 inherit it. Using a similar syntax for Lox gives you one less thing to learn.
 A High-Level Language
 While this book ended up bigger than I was hoping, it’s still not big enough to
 fit a huge language like Java in it. In order to fit two complete implementations
 A tutorial isn’t very fun if you can’t try the
 code out yourself. Alas, you don’t have a Lox
 interpreter yet, since you haven’t built one!
 Fear not. You can use mine.
 Your first taste of Lox, the language, that is. I
 don’t know if you’ve ever had the cured, cold
smoked salmon before. If not, give it a try
 too.
 I’m surely biased, but I think Lox’s syntax is
 pretty clean. C’s most egregious grammar
 problems are around types. Dennis Ritchie
 had this idea called “declaration reflects use”
 where variable declarations mirror the
 operations you would have to perform on the
 variable to get to a value of the base type.
 Clever idea, but I don’t think it worked out
 great in practice.
 Lox doesn’t have static types, so we avoid
 that.
 3 . 2
of Lox in these pages, Lox itself has to be pretty compact.
 When I think of languages that are small but useful, what comes to mind are
 high-level “scripting” languages like JavaScript, Scheme, and Lua. Of those
 three, Lox looks most like JavaScript, mainly because most C-syntax languages
 do. As we’ll learn later, Lox’s approach to scoping hews closely to Scheme. The
 C flavor of Lox we’ll build in Part III is heavily indebted to Lua’s clean, efficient
 implementation.
 Lox shares two other aspects with those three languages:
 Dynamic typing
 3 . 2 . 1
 Lox is dynamically typed. Variables can store values of any type, and a single
 variable can even store values of different types at different times. If you try to
 perform an operation on values of the wrong type—say, dividing a number by a
 string—then the error is detected and reported at runtime.
 There are plenty of reasons to like static types, but they don’t outweigh the
 pragmatic reasons to pick dynamic types for Lox. A static type system is a ton of
 work to learn and implement. Skipping it gives you a simpler language and a
 shorter book. We’ll get our interpreter up and executing bits of code sooner if
 we defer our type checking to runtime.
 Automatic memory management
 3 . 2 . 2
 High-level languages exist to eliminate error-prone, low-level drudgery and
 what could be more tedious than manually managing the allocation and freeing
 of storage? No one rises and greets the morning sun with, “I can’t wait to figure
 out the correct place to call free() for every byte of memory I allocate today!”
 There are two main techniques for managing memory: reference counting and
 tracing garbage collection (usually just called “garbage collection” or “GC”).
 Ref counters are much simpler to implement—I think that’s why Perl, PHP, and
 Python all started out using them. But, over time, the limitations of ref counting
 become too troublesome. All of those languages eventually ended up adding a
 full tracing GC or at least enough of one to clean up object cycles.
 Tracing garbage collection has a fearsome reputation. It is a little harrowing
 working at the level of raw memory. Debugging a GC can sometimes leave you
 seeing hex dumps in your dreams. But, remember, this book is about dispelling
 magic and slaying those monsters, so we are going to write our own garbage
 collector. I think you’ll find the algorithm is quite simple and a lot of fun to
 implement.
 Data Types
 Now that JavaScript has taken over the world
 and is used to build ginormous applications,
 it’s hard to think of it as a “little scripting
 language”. But Brendan Eich hacked the first
 JS interpreter into Netscape Navigator in ten
 days to make buttons animate on web pages.
 JavaScript has grown up since then, but it was
 once a cute little language.
 Because Eich slapped JS together with
 roughly the same raw materials and time as
 an episode of MacGyver, it has some weird
 semantic corners where the duct tape and
 paper clips show through. Things like
 variable hoisting, dynamically-bound this,
 holes in arrays, and implicit conversions.
 I had the luxury of taking my time on Lox, so
 it should be a little cleaner.
 After all, the two languages we’ll be using to
 implement Lox are both statically typed.
 In practice, ref counting and tracing are more
 ends of a continuum than opposing sides.
 Most ref counting systems end up doing
 some tracing to handle cycles, and the write
 barriers of a generational collector look a bit
 like retain calls if you squint.
 For lots more on this, see “A Unified Theory
 of Garbage Collection” (PDF).
 3 . 3
In Lox’s little universe, the atoms that make up all matter are the built-in data
 types. There are only a few:
 Booleans – You can’t code without logic and you can’t logic without Boolean
 values. “True” and “false”, the yin and yang of software. Unlike some ancient
 languages that repurpose an existing type to represent truth and falsehood,
 Lox has a dedicated Boolean type. We may be roughing it on this expedition,
 but we aren’t savages.
 There are two Boolean values, obviously, and a literal for each one:
 true;  // Not false.
 false; // Not *not* false.
 Numbers – Lox only has one kind of number: double-precision floating
 point. Since floating point numbers can also represent a wide range of
 integers, that covers a lot of territory, while keeping things simple.
 Full-featured languages have lots of syntax for numbers—hexadecimal,
 scientific notation, octal, all sorts of fun stuff. We’ll settle for basic integer
 and decimal literals:
 1234;  // An integer.
 12.34; // A decimal number.
 Strings – We’ve already seen one string literal in the first example. Like most
 languages, they are enclosed in double quotes:
 "I am a string";
 "";    
// The empty string.
 "123"; // This is a string, not a number.
 As we’ll see when we get to implementing them, there is quite a lot of
 complexity hiding in that innocuous sequence of characters.
 Nil – There’s one last built-in value who’s never invited to the party but
 always seems to show up. It represents “no value”. It’s called “null” in many
 other languages. In Lox we spell it nil. (When we get to implementing it,
 that will help distinguish when we’re talking about Lox’s nil versus Java or
 C’s null.)
 There are good arguments for not having a null value in a language since
 null pointer errors are the scourge of our industry. If we were doing a
 statically-typed language, it would be worth trying to ban it. In a
 dynamically-typed one, though, eliminating it is often more annoying than
 having it.
 Expressions
 Boolean variables are the only data type in
 Lox named after a person, George Boole,
 which is why “Boolean” is capitalized. He
 died in 1864, nearly a century before digital
 computers turned his algebra into electricity.
 I wonder what he’d think to see his name all
 over billions of lines of Java code.
 Even that word “character” is a trickster. Is it
 ASCII? Unicode? A code point, or a
 “grapheme cluster”? How are characters
 encoded? Is each character a fixed size, or can
 they vary?
 3 . 4
If built-in data types and their literals are atoms, then expressions must be the
 molecules. Most of these will be familiar.
 Arithmetic
 Lox features the basic arithmetic operators you know and love from C and
 other languages:
 add + me;
 subtract - me;
 multiply * me;
 divide / me;
 3 . 4 . 1
 The subexpressions on either side of the operator are operands. Because there
 are two of them, these are called binary operators. (It has nothing to do with the
 ones-and-zeroes use of “binary”.) Because the operator is fixed in the middle of
 the operands, these are also called infix operators as opposed to prefix
 operators where the operator comes before and postfix where it follows the
 operand.
 One arithmetic operator is actually both an infix and a prefix one. The 
operator can also be used to negate a number:-negateMe;
 All of these operators work on numbers, and it’s an error to pass any other types
 to them. The exception is the + operator—you can also pass it two strings to
 With this part, we begin jlox, the first of our two interpreters. Programming
 languages are a huge topic with piles of concepts and terminology to cram into
 your brain all at once. Programming language theory requires a level of mental
 rigor that you probably haven’t had to summon since your last Calculus final.
 (Fortunately there isn’t too much theory in this book.)
 Implementing an interpreter uses a few architectural tricks and design patterns
 uncommon in other kinds of applications, so we’ll be getting used to the
 engineering side of things too. Given all of that, we’ll keep the code we have to
 write as simple and plain as possible.
 In less than two thousand lines of clean Java code, we’ll build a complete
 interpreter for Lox that implements every single feature of the language, exactly
 as we’ve specified. The first few chapters work front-to-back through the
 phases of the interpreter—scanning, parsing, and evaluating code. After that,
 we add language features one at a time, growing a simple calculator into a full
fledged scripting language.
 NEXT CHAPTER: “SCANNING” →
 Hand-cra!ed by Robert Nystrom — © 2015 – 2020
4
 Scanning
 Take big bites. Anything worth doing is worth
 overdoing.
 “ ”
 — Robert A. Heinlein, Time Enough for Love
 The first step in any compiler or interpreter is scanning. The scanner takes in
 raw source code as a series of characters and groups it into a series of chunks
 we call tokens. These are the meaningful “words” and “punctuation” that make
 up the language’s grammar.
 Scanning is a good starting point for us too because the code isn’t very
 hard—pretty much a switch statement with delusions of grandeur. It will help
 us warm up before we tackle some of the more interesting material later. By the
 end of this chapter, we’ll have a full-featured, fast scanner that can take any
 string of Lox source code and produce the tokens that we’ll feed into the parser
 in the next chapter.
 The Interpreter Framework
 4 . 1
 Since this is our first real chapter, before we get to actually scanning some code,
 we need to sketch out the basic shape of our interpreter, jlox. Everything starts
 with a class in Java:
 package com.craftinginterpreters.lox;
 import java.io.BufferedReader;
 import java.io.IOException;
 import java.io.InputStreamReader;
 import java.nio.charset.Charset;
 import java.nio.file.Files;
 import java.nio.file.Paths;
 import java.util.List;
 public class Lox {
 public static void main(String[] args) throws IOException {
 if (args.length > 1) {
 System.out.println("Usage: jlox [script]");
 System.exit(64); 
    } 
    } 
    }
  }
 else if (args.length == 1) {
 runFile(args[0]);
 else {
 runPrompt();
 This task has been variously called “scanning”
 and “lexing” (short for “lexical analysis”) over
 the years. Way back when computers were as
 big as Winnebagos but had less memory than
 your watch, some people used “scanner” only
 to refer to the piece of code that dealt with
 reading raw source code characters from disk
 and buffering them in memory. Then “lexing”
 was the subsequent phase that did useful stuff
 with the characters.
 These days, reading a source file into
 memory is trivial, so it’s rarely a distinct
 phase in the compiler. Because of that, the
 two terms are basically interchangeable.
 <<
 lox/Lox.java
 create new file
 For exit codes, I’m using the conventions
 defined in the UNIX “sysexits.h” header. It’s
 the closest thing to a standard I could find.
 }
Stick that in a text file, and go get your IDE or Makefile or whatever set up. I’ll
 be right here when you’re ready. Good? OK!
 Lox is a scripting language, which means it executes directly from source. Our
 interpreter supports two ways of running code. If you start jlox from the
 command line and give it a path to a file, it reads the file and executes it.
 private static void runFile(String path) throws IOException {
 byte[] bytes = Files.readAllBytes(Paths.get(path));
 run(new String(bytes, Charset.defaultCharset()));
  }
 If you want a more intimate conversation with your interpreter, you can also
 run it interactively. Fire up jlox without any arguments, and it drops you into a
 prompt where you can enter and execute code one line at a time.
 private static void runPrompt() throws IOException {
 InputStreamReader input = new InputStreamReader(System.in);
 BufferedReader reader = new BufferedReader(input);
 for (;;) { 
System.out.print("> ");
 String line = reader.readLine();
 if (line == null) break;
 run(line);
    }
  }
 The readLine() function, as the name so helpfully implies, reads a line of
 input from the user on the command line and returns the result. To kill an
 interactive command-line app, you usually type Control-D. Doing so signals an
 “end-of-file” condition to the program. When that happens readLine()
 returns null, so we check for that to exit the loop.
 Both the prompt and the file runner are thin wrappers around this core
 function:
 private static void run(String source) {
 Scanner scanner = new Scanner(source);
 List<Token> tokens = scanner.scanTokens();
 // For now, just print the tokens.
 for (Token token : tokens) {
 System.out.println(token);
    }
  }
 It’s not super useful yet since we haven’t written the interpreter, but baby steps,
 you know? Right now, it prints out the tokens our forthcoming scanner will
 emit so that we can see if we’re making progress.
 <<
 <<
 <<
 lox/Lox.java
 add after main()
 lox/Lox.java
 add after runFile()
 An interactive prompt is also called a “REPL”
 (pronounced like “rebel” but with a “p”). The
 name comes from Lisp where implementing
 one is as simple as wrapping a loop around a
 few built-in functions:
 (print (eval (read)))
 Working outwards from the most nested call,
 you Read a line of input, Evaluate it, Print the
 result, then Loop and do it all over again.
 lox/Lox.java
 add after runPrompt()
Error handling
 4 . 1 . 1
 While we’re setting things up, another key piece of infrastructure is error
 handling. Textbooks sometimes gloss over this because it’s more a practical
 matter than a formal computer science-y problem. But if you care about making
 a language that’s actually usable, then handling errors gracefully is vital.
 The tools our language provides for dealing with errors make up a large portion
 of its user interface. When the user’s code is working, they aren’t thinking about
 our language at all—their headspace is all about their program. It’s usually only
 when things go wrong that they notice our implementation.
 When that happens, it’s up to us to give the user all the information they need to
 understand what went wrong and guide them gently back to where they are
 trying to go. Doing that well means thinking about error handling all through
 the implementation of our interpreter, starting now.
 static void error(int line, String message) {
 report(line, "", message);
  }
 private static void report(int line, String where,
 String message) {
 System.err.println(
 "[line " + line + "] Error" + where + ": " + message);
 hadError = true;
  }
 This error() function and its report() helper tells the user some syntax
 error occurred on a given line. That is really the bare minimum to be able to
 claim you even have error reporting. Imagine if you accidentally left a dangling
 comma in some function call and the interpreter printed out:
 Error: Unexpected "," somewhere in your code. Good luck finding it!
 That’s not very helpful. We need to at least point them to the right line. Even
 better would be the beginning and end column so they know where in the line.
 Even better than that is to show the user the offending line, like:
 Error: Unexpected "," in argument list.
    15 | function(first, second,);
                               ^-- Here.
 I’d love to implement something like that in this book but the honest truth is
 that it’s a lot of grungy string munging code. Very useful for users, but not super
 fun to read in a book and not very technically interesting. So we’ll stick with
 just a line number. In your own interpreters, please do as I say and not as I do.
 The primary reason we’re sticking this error reporting function in the main Lox
 class is because of that hadError field. It’s defined here:
 Having said all that, for this interpreter, what
 we’ll build is pretty bare bones. I’d love to talk
 about interactive debuggers, static analyzers
 and other fun stuff, but there’s only so much
 ink in the pen.
 <<
 lox/Lox.java
 add after run()
public class Lox {
 <<
 static boolean hadError = false;
 We’ll use this to ensure we don’t try to execute code that has a known error.
 Also, it lets us exit with a non-zero exit code like a good command line citizen
 should.
    run(new String(bytes, Charset.defaultCharset()));
 // Indicate an error in the exit code.
 if (hadError) System.exit(65);
  }
 We need to reset this flag in the interactive loop. If the user makes a mistake, it
 shouldn’t kill their entire session.
      run(line);
 hadError = false;
    }
 The other reason I pulled the error reporting out here instead of stuffing it into
 the scanner and other phases where the error occurs is to remind you that it’s a
 good engineering practice to separate the code that generates the errors from the
 code that reports them.
 Various phases of the front end will detect errors, but it’s not really their job to
 know how to present that to a user. In a full-featured language implementation,
 you will likely have multiple ways errors get displayed: on stderr, in an IDE’s
 error window, logged to a file, etc. You don’t want that code smeared all over
 your scanner and parser.
 Ideally, we would have an actual abstraction, some kind of “ErrorReporter”
 interface that gets passed to the scanner and parser so that we can swap out
 different reporting strategies. For our simple interpreter here, I didn’t do that,
 but I did at least move the code for error reporting into a different class.
 With some rudimentary error handling in place, our application shell is ready.
 Once we have a Scanner class with a scanTokens() method, we can start
 running it. Before we get to that, let’s get more precise about what tokens are.
 Lexemes and Tokens
 Here’s a line of Lox code:
 var language = "lox";
 Here, var is the keyword for declaring a variable. That three-character
 sequence “v-a-r” means something. But if we yank three letters out of the
 middle of language, like “g-u-a”, those don’t mean anything on their own.
 4 . 2
 lox/Lox.java
 in class Lox
 <<
 <<
 lox/Lox.java
 in runFile()
 lox/Lox.java
 in runPrompt()
 I had exactly that when I first implemented
 jlox. I ended up tearing it out because it felt
 over-engineered for the minimal interpreter
 in this book.
That’s what lexical analysis is about. Our job is to scan through the list of
 characters and group them together into the smallest sequences that still
 represent something. Each of these blobs of characters is called a lexeme. In
 that example line of code, the lexemes are:
 The lexemes are only the raw substrings of the source code. However, in the
 process of grouping character sequences into lexemes, we also stumble upon
 some other useful information. When we take the lexeme and bundle it together
 with that other data, the result is a token. It includes useful stuff like:
 Token type
 4 . 2 . 1
 Keywords are part of the shape of the language’s grammar, so the parser often
 has code like, “If the next token is while then do…” That means the parser
 wants to know not just that it has a lexeme for some identifier, but that it has a
 reserved word, and which keyword it is.
 The parser could categorize tokens from the raw lexeme by comparing the
 strings, but that’s slow and kind of ugly. Instead, at the point that we recognize a
 lexeme, we also remember which kind of lexeme it represents. We have a
 different type for each keyword, operator, bit of punctuation, and literal type.
 package com.craftinginterpreters.lox;
 enum TokenType {
 // Single-character tokens.
 LEFT_PAREN, RIGHT_PAREN, LEFT_BRACE, RIGHT_BRACE,
 COMMA, DOT, MINUS, PLUS, SEMICOLON, SLASH, STAR,
 // One or two character tokens.
 BANG, BANG_EQUAL,
 EQUAL, EQUAL_EQUAL,
 GREATER, GREATER_EQUAL,
 LESS, LESS_EQUAL,
 // Literals.
 IDENTIFIER, STRING, NUMBER,
 // Keywords.
 AND, CLASS, ELSE, FALSE, FUN, FOR, IF, NIL, OR,
 PRINT, RETURN, SUPER, THIS, TRUE, VAR, WHILE,
 EOF
 }
 Literal value
 4 . 2 . 2
 After all, string comparison ends up looking
 at individual characters, and isn’t that the
 scanner’s job?
 <<
 lox/TokenType.java
 create new file
 There are lexemes for literal values—numbers and strings and the like. Since
the scanner has to walk each character in the literal to correctly identify it, it
 can also convert that textual representation of a value to the living runtime
 object that will be used by the interpreter later.
 Location information
 4 . 2 . 3
 Back when I was preaching the gospel about error handling, we saw that we
 need to tell users where errors occurred. Tracking that starts here. In our simple
 interpreter, we only note which line the token appears on, but more
 sophisticated implementations include the column and length too.
 We take all of this data and wrap it in a class.
 package com.craftinginterpreters.lox;
 class Token {
 final TokenType type;
 final String lexeme;
 final Object literal;
 final int line; 
Token(TokenType type, String lexeme, Object literal, int line) {
 this.type = type;
 this.lexeme = lexeme;
 this.literal = literal;
 this.line = line;
  }
 public String toString() {
 return type + " " + lexeme + " " + literal;
  }
 }
 Now we have an object with enough structure to be useful for all of the later
 phases of the interpreter.
 Regular Languages and Expressions
 4 . 3
 Now that we know what we’re trying to produce, let’s, well, produce it. The
 core of the scanner is a loop. Starting at the first character of the source code, it
 figures out what lexeme it belongs to, and consumes it and any following
 characters that are part of that lexeme. When it reaches the end of that lexeme,
 it emits a token.
 Then it loops back and does it again, starting from the very next character in the
 source code. It keeps doing that, eating characters and occasionally, uh,
 excreting tokens, until it reaches the end of the input.
 Some token implementations store the
 location as two numbers: the offset from the
 beginning of the source file to the beginning
 of the lexeme, and the length of the lexeme.
 The scanner needs to know these anyway, so
 there’s no overhead to calculate them.
 <<
 lox/Token.java
 create new file
 An offset can be converted to line and
 column positions later by looking back at the
 source file and counting the preceding
 newlines. That sounds slow, and it is.
 However, you only need to do it when you
 need to actually display a line and column to the
 user. Most tokens never appear in an error
 message. For those, the less time you spend
 calculating position information ahead of
 time, the better.
 Lexical analygator.
It pains me to gloss over the theory so much,
 especially when it’s as interesting as I think
 the Chomsky hierarchy and finite-state
 machines are. But the honest truth is other
 books cover this better than I could.
 The part of the loop where we look at a handful of characters to figure out
 which kind of lexeme it “matches” may sound familiar. If you know regular
 expressions, you might consider defining a regex for each kind of lexeme and
 use those to match characters. For example, Lox has the same rules as C for
 identifiers (variable names and the like). This regex matches one:
 [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z_0-9]*
 If you did think of regular expressions, your intuition is a deep one. The rules
 that determine how a particular language groups characters into lexemes are
 called its lexical grammar. In Lox, as in most programming languages, the rules
 of that grammar are simple enough to be classified a regular language. That’s
 the same “regular” as in regular expressions.
 You very precisely can recognize all of the different lexemes for Lox using
 regexes if you want to, and there’s a pile of interesting theory underlying why
 that is and what it means. Tools like Lex or Flex are designed expressly to let
 you do this—throw a handful of regexes at them, and they give you a complete
 scanner back.
 Since our goal is to understand how a scanner does what it does, we won’t be
 delegating that task. We’re about hand-crafted goods.
 The Scanner Class
 Without further ado, let’s make ourselves a scanner.
 package com.craftinginterpreters.lox;
 import java.util.ArrayList;
 import java.util.HashMap;
 import java.util.List;
 import java.util.Map;
 import static com.craftinginterpreters.lox.TokenType.*; 
class Scanner {
 private final String source;
 private final List<Token> tokens = new ArrayList<>();
 Scanner(String source) {
 this.source = source;
 4 . 4
 Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools
 (universally known as “the Dragon Book”) is
 the canonical reference.
 Lex was created by Mike Lesk and Eric
 Schmidt. Yes, the same Eric Schmidt who was
 executive chairman of Google. I’m not saying
 programming languages are a sure-fire path
 to wealth and fame, but we can count at least
 one mega-billionaire among us.
 I know static imports are considered bad
 style by some, but they save me from having
 to sprinkle TokenType. all over the scanner
 and parser. Forgive me, but every character
 counts in a book.
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 create new file
}
  }
 We store the raw source code as a simple string, and we have a list ready to fill
 with tokens we’re going to generate. The aforementioned loop that does that
 looks like this:
 List<Token> scanTokens() {
 while (!isAtEnd()) {
 // We are at the beginning of the next lexeme.
 start = current;
 scanToken();
    }
 tokens.add(new Token(EOF, "", null, line));
 return tokens;
  }
 The scanner works its way through the source code, adding tokens until it runs
 out of characters. Then it appends one final “end of file” token. That isn’t strictly
 needed, but it makes our parser a little cleaner.
 This loop depends on a couple of fields to keep track of where the scanner is in
 the source code.
  private final List<Token> tokens = new ArrayList<>();
 private int start = 0;
 private int current = 0;
 private int line = 1;
  Scanner(String source) {
 The start and current fields are offsets that index into the string. The
 start field points to the first character in the lexeme being scanned, and
 current points at the character currently being considered. The line field
 tracks what source line current is on so we can produce tokens that know
 their location.
 Then we have one little helper function that tells us if we’ve consumed all the
 characters.
 private boolean isAtEnd() {
 return current >= source.length();
  }
 Recognizing Lexemes
 4 . 5
 Each turn of the loop, we scan a single token. This is the real heart of the
 scanner. We’ll start simple. Imagine if every lexeme is only a single character
 long. All you need to do is consume the next character and pick a token type for
 it. Several lexemes are only a single character in Lox, so let’s start with those.
 <<
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after Scanner()
 lox/Scanner.java
 in class Scanner
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanTokens()
 Wondering why / isn’t in here? Don’t worry,
 we’ll get to it.
<<
 private void scanToken() {
 char c = advance();
 switch (c) {
 case '(': addToken(LEFT_PAREN); break;
 case ')': addToken(RIGHT_PAREN); break;
 case '{': addToken(LEFT_BRACE); break;
 case '}': addToken(RIGHT_BRACE); break;
 case ',': addToken(COMMA); break;
 case '.': addToken(DOT); break;
 case '-': addToken(MINUS); break;
 case '+': addToken(PLUS); break;
 case ';': addToken(SEMICOLON); break;
 case '*': addToken(STAR); break; 
    }
  }
 Again, we need a couple of helper methods.
 private char advance() {
 current++;
 return source.charAt(current - 1);
  }
 private void addToken(TokenType type) {
 addToken(type, null);
  }
 private void addToken(TokenType type, Object literal) {
 String text = source.substring(start, current);
 tokens.add(new Token(type, text, literal, line));
  }
 The advance() method consumes the next character in the source file and
 returns it. Where advance() is for input, addToken() is for output. It grabs
 the text of the current lexeme and creates a new token for it. We’ll use the other
 overload to handle tokens with literal values soon.
 Lexical errors
 Before we get too far in, let’s take a moment to think about errors at the lexical
 level. What happens if a user throws a source file containing some characters
 Lox doesn’t use, like @#^ at our interpreter? Right now, those characters get
 silently discarded. They aren’t used by the Lox language, but that doesn’t mean
 the interpreter can pretend they aren’t there. Instead, we report an error.
      case '*': addToken(STAR); break; 
default:
 Lox.error(line, "Unexpected character.");
 break;
    }
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanTokens()
 <<
 4 . 5 . 1
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after isAtEnd()
 The code reports each invalid character
 separately, so this shotguns the user with a
 blast of errors if they accidentally paste a big
 blob of weird text. Coalescing a run of invalid
 characters into a single error would give a
 nicer user experience.
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 Note that the erroneous character is still consumed by the earlier call to
advance(). That’s important so that we don’t get stuck in an infinite loop.
 Note also that we keep scanning. There may be other errors later in the program.
 It gives our users a better experience if we detect as many of those as possible in
 one go. Otherwise, they see one tiny error and fix it, only to have the next error
 appear, and so on. Syntax error Whack-a-mole is no fun.
 (Don’t worry. Since hadError gets set, we’ll never try to execute any of the
 code, even though we keep going and scan the rest of it.)
 Operators
 4 . 5 . 2
 We have single-character lexemes working, but that doesn’t cover all of Lox’s
 operators. What about !? It’s a single character, right? Sometimes, yes, but if the
 very next character is an equals sign, then we should instead create a != lexeme.
 Note that the ! and = are not two independent operators. You can’t write ! =
 in Lox and have it behave like an inequality operator. That’s why we need to
 scan != as a single lexeme. Likewise, <, >, and = can all be followed by = to
 create the other equality and comparison operators.
 For all of these, we need to look at the second character.
      case '*': addToken(STAR); break; 
case '!':
 addToken(match('=') ? BANG_EQUAL : BANG);
 break;
 case '=':
 addToken(match('=') ? EQUAL_EQUAL : EQUAL);
 break;
 case '<':
 addToken(match('=') ? LESS_EQUAL : LESS);
 break;
 case '>':
 addToken(match('=') ? GREATER_EQUAL : GREATER);
 break;
      default:
 Those cases use this new method:
 private boolean match(char expected) {
 if (isAtEnd()) return false;
 if (source.charAt(current) != expected) return false;
 current++;
 return true;
  }
 It’s like a conditional advance(). We only consume the current character if it’s
 what we’re looking for.
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanToken()
 Using match(), we recognize these lexemes in two stages. When we reach, for
example, !, we jump to its switch case. That means we know the lexeme starts
 with !. Then we look at the next character to determine if we’re on a != or
 merely a !.
 Longer Lexemes
 We’re still missing one operator, / for division. That character needs a little
 special handling because comments begin with a slash too.
        break;
 case '/':
 if (match('/')) {
 // A comment goes until the end of the line.
 while (peek() != '\n' && !isAtEnd()) advance();
        } 
        }
 else {
 addToken(SLASH);
 break;
      default:
 4 . 6
 This is similar to the other two-character operators, except that when we find a
 second /, we don’t end the token yet. Instead, we keep consuming characters
 until we reach the end of the line.
 This is our general strategy for handling longer lexemes. After we detect the
 beginning of one, we shunt over to some lexeme-specific code that keeps eating
 characters until it sees the end.
 We’ve got another helper:
 private char peek() {
 if (isAtEnd()) return '\0';
 return source.charAt(current);
  }
 It’s sort of like advance(), but doesn’t consume the character. This is called
 lookahead. Since it only looks at the current unconsumed character, we have
 one character of lookahead. The smaller this number is, generally, the faster the
 scanner runs. The rules of the lexical grammar dictate how much lookahead we
 need. Fortunately, most languages in wide use only peek one or two characters
 ahead.
 Comments are lexemes, but they aren’t meaningful, and the parser doesn’t want
 to deal with them. So when we reach the end of the comment, we don’t call
 addToken(). When we loop back around to start the next lexeme, start gets
 reset and the comment’s lexeme disappears in a puff of smoke.
 While we’re at it, now’s a good time to skip over those other meaningless
 characters: newlines and whitespace.
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 Technically, match() is doing lookahead
 too. advance() and peek() are the
 fundamental operators and match()
 combines them.
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after match()
        break;
 <<
 case ' ':
 case '\r':
 case '\t':
 // Ignore whitespace.
 break;
 case '\n':
 line++;
 break;
      default:
        Lox.error(line, "Unexpected character.");
 When encountering whitespace, we simply go back to the beginning of the scan
 loop. That starts a new lexeme after the whitespace character. For newlines, we
 do the same thing, but we also increment the line counter. (This is why we used
 peek() to find the newline ending a comment instead of match(). We want
 that newline to get us here so we can update line.)
 Our scanner is getting smarter. It can handle fairly free-form code like:
 // this is a comment
 (( )){} // grouping stuff
 !*+-/=<> <= == // operators
 String literals
 Now that we’re comfortable with longer lexemes, we’re ready to tackle literals.
 We’ll do strings first, since they always begin with a specific character, ":
        break;
 case '"': string(); break;
      default:
 That calls:
 private void string() {
 while (peek() != '"' && !isAtEnd()) {
 if (peek() == '\n') line++;
 advance();
    }
 if (isAtEnd()) {
 Lox.error(line, "Unterminated string.");
 return;
    }
 // The closing ".
 advance();
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 4 . 6 . 1
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanToken()
 Since we only look for a digit to start a
 number, that means -123 is not a number
 literal. Instead, -123, is an expression that
 applies - to the number literal 123. In
 practice, the result is the same, though it has
 one interesting edge case if we were to add
 method calls on numbers. Consider:
  }
 // Trim the surrounding quotes.
 print -123.abs();
 String value = source.substring(start + 1, current - 1);
 addToken(STRING, value);
 Like with comments, we consume characters until we hit the " that ends the
 string. We also gracefully handle running out of input before the string is closed
 and report an error for that.
 For no particular reason, Lox supports multi-line strings. There are pros and
 cons to that, but prohibiting them was a little more complex than allowing
 them, so I left them in. That does mean we also need to update line when we
 hit a newline inside a string.
 Finally, the last interesting bit is that when we create the token, we also produce
 the actual string value that will be used later by the interpreter. Here, that
 conversion only requires a substring() to strip off the surrounding quotes.
 If Lox supported escape sequences like \n, we’d unescape those here.
 Number literals
 4 . 6 . 2
 All numbers in Lox are floating point at runtime, but it supports both integer
 and decimal literals. A number literal is a series of digits optionally followed by
 a . and one or more trailing digits:
 1234
 12.34
 We don’t allow a leading or trailing decimal point, so these are both invalid:
 .1234
 1234.
 We could easily support the former, but I left it out to keep things simple. The
 latter gets weird if we ever want to allow methods on numbers like
 123.sqrt().
 To recognize the beginning of a number lexeme, we look for any digit. It’s kind
 of tedious to add cases for every decimal digit, so we’ll stuff it in the default case
 instead.
      default:
 if (isDigit(c)) {
 number();
        } 
else {
 Lox.error(line, "Unexpected character.");
        }
        break;
 This prints -123 because negation has lower
 precedence than method calls. We could fix
 that by making - part of the number literal.
 But then consider:
 var n = 123;
 print -n.abs();
 This still produces -123, so now the
 language seems inconsistent. No matter what
 you do, some case ends up weird.
 The Java standard library provides
 Character.isDigit() which seems like a
 good fit. Alas, that method allows things like
 Devanagari digits, fullwidth numbers, and
 other funny stuff we don’t want.
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 replace 1 line
 I could have made peek() take a parameter
 for the number of characters ahead to look
 instead of defining two functions, but that
This relies on this little utility:
 <<
 private boolean isDigit(char c) {
 return c >= '0' && c <= '9';
  } 
Once we know we are in a number, we branch to a separate method to consume
 the rest of the literal, like we do with strings.
 private void number() {
 while (isDigit(peek())) advance();
 // Look for a fractional part.
 if (peek() == '.' && isDigit(peekNext())) {
 // Consume the "."
 advance();
 while (isDigit(peek())) advance();
    }
 addToken(NUMBER,
 Double.parseDouble(source.substring(start, current)));
  }
 We consume as many digits as we find for the integer part of the literal. Then
 we look for a fractional part, which is a decimal point (.) followed by at least
 one digit. If we do have a fractional part, again, we consume as many digits as
 we can find.
 Looking past the decimal point requires a second character of lookahead since
 we don’t want to consume the . until we’re sure there is a digit after it. So we
 add:
 private char peekNext() {
 if (current + 1 >= source.length()) return '\0';
 return source.charAt(current + 1);
  } 
Finally, we convert the lexeme to its numeric value. Our interpreter uses Java’s
 Double type to represent numbers, so we produce a value of that type. We’re
 using Java’s own parsing method to convert the lexeme to a real Java double. We
 could implement that ourselves, but, honestly, unless you’re trying to cram for
 an upcoming programming interview, it’s not worth your time.
 The remaining literals are Booleans and nil, but we handle those as keywords,
 which gets us to…
 Reserved Words and Identifiers
 4 . 7
 Our scanner is almost done. The only remaining pieces of the lexical grammar
 to implement are identifiers and their close cousins, the reserved words. You
 would allow arbitrarily far lookahead. Only
 providing these two functions makes it
 clearer to a reader of the code that our
 scanner only looks ahead at most two
 characters.
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after peek()
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanToken()
 Consider this nasty bit of C code:---a;
 Is it valid? That depends on how the scanner
 splits the lexemes. If the scanner sees it like:- --a;
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after peek()
 Then it could be parsed. But that would
 require the scanner to know about the
 grammatical structure of the surrounding
 code, which entangles things more than we
 want. Instead, the maximal munch rule says
 that it is always scanned like:-- -a;
 It scans it that way even though doing so
 leads to a syntax error later in the parser.
might think we could match keywords like or in the same way we handle
 multiple-character operators like <=:
 case 'o':
 if (peek() == 'r') {
 addToken(OR);
  }
 break;
 Consider what would happen if a user named a variable orchid. The scanner
 would see the first two letters, or, and immediately emit an or keyword token.
 This gets us to an important principle called maximal munch. When two
 lexical grammar rules can both match a chunk of code that the scanner is
 looking at, whichever one matches the most characters wins.
 That rule states that if we can match orchid as an identifier and or as a
 keyword, then the former wins. This is also why we tacitly assumed previously
 that <= should be scanned as a single <= token and not < followed by =.
 Maximal munch means we can’t easily detect a reserved word until we’ve
 reached the end of what might instead be an identifier. After all, a reserved
 word is an identifier, it’s just one that has been claimed by the language for its
 own use. That’s where the term reserved word comes from.
 So we begin by assuming any lexeme starting with a letter or underscore is an
 identifier.
      default:
        if (isDigit(c)) {
          number();
        } 
else if (isAlpha(c)) {
 identifier();
        } else {
          Lox.error(line, "Unexpected character.");
        }
 The rest of the code lives over here:
 private void identifier() {
 while (isAlphaNumeric(peek())) advance();
 addToken(IDENTIFIER);
  }
 We define that in terms of these helpers:
 private boolean isAlpha(char c) {
 return (c >= 'a' && c <= 'z') ||
           (c
 >= 'A' && c <= 'Z') ||
 c == '_';
  }
 <<
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in scanToken()
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after scanToken()
 lox/Scanner.java
 add after peekNext()
 private boolean isAlphaNumeric(char c) {
  }
 return isAlpha(c) || isDigit(c);
 That gets identifiers working. To handle keywords, we see if the identifier’s
 lexeme is one of the reserved words. If so, we use a token type specific to that
 keyword. We define the set of reserved words in a map:
 private static final Map<String, TokenType> keywords;
 static {
 keywords = new HashMap<>();
 keywords.put("and",    
AND);
 keywords.put("class",  CLASS);
 keywords.put("else",   
ELSE);
 keywords.put("false",  FALSE);
 keywords.put("for",    
FOR);
 keywords.put("fun",    
keywords.put("if",     
keywords.put("nil",    
keywords.put("or",     
FUN);
 IF);
 NIL);
 OR);
 keywords.put("print",  PRINT);
 keywords.put("return", RETURN);
 keywords.put("super",  SUPER);
 keywords.put("this",   
THIS);
 keywords.put("true",   
keywords.put("var",    
TRUE);
 VAR);
 keywords.put("while",  WHILE);
  }
 Then, after we scan an identifier, we check to see if it matches anything in the
 map:
    while (isAlphaNumeric(peek())) advance();
 String text = source.substring(start, current);
 TokenType type = keywords.get(text);
 if (type == null) type = IDENTIFIER;
 addToken(type);
  }
 If so, we use that keyword’s token type. Otherwise, it’s a regular user-defined
 identifier.
 And with that, we now have a complete scanner for the entire Lox lexical
 grammar. Fire up the REPL and type in some valid and invalid code. Does it
 produce the tokens you expect? Try to come up with some interesting edge
 cases and see if it handles them as it should.
 CHALLENGES
 1. 
2. 
The lexical grammars of Python and Haskell are not regular. What does that mean,
 and why aren’t they?
 Aside from separating tokens—distinguishing print foo from printfoo —
 spaces aren’t used for much in most languages. However, in a couple of dark
 <<
 <<
 lox/Scanner.java
 in class Scanner
 lox/Scanner.java
 in identifier()
 replace 1 line
3. 
corners, a space does a!ect how code is parsed in Co!eeScript, Ruby, and the C
 preprocessor. Where and what e!ect does it have in each of those languages?
 Our scanner here, like most, discards comments and whitespace since those aren’t
 needed by the parser. Why might you want to write a scanner that does not discard
 those? What would it be useful for?
 4. 
Add support to Lox’s scanner for C-style /* ... */ block comments. Make sure
 to handle newlines in them. Consider allowing them to nest. Is adding support for
 nesting more work than you expected? Why?
 DESIGN NOTE: IMPLICIT SEMICOLONS
 Programmers today are spoiled for choice in languages and have gotten picky about
 syntax. They want their language to look clean and modern. One bit of syntactic lichen
 that almost every new language scrapes o! (and some ancient ones like BASIC never
 had) is ; as an explicit statement terminator.
 Instead, they treat a newline as a statement terminator where it makes sense to do so.
 The “where it makes sense” part is the challenging bit. While most statements are on
 their own line, sometimes you need to spread a single statement across a couple of
 lines. Those intermingled newlines should not be treated as terminators.
 Most of the obvious cases where the newline should be ignored are easy to detect, but
 there are a handful of nasty ones:
 A return value on the next line:
 if (condition) return
 "value"
 Is “value” the value being returned, or do we have a return statement with no
 value followed by an expression statement containing a string literal?
 A parenthesized expression on the next line:
 func
 (parenthesized)
 Is this a call to func(parenthesized), or two expression statements, one for
 func and one for a parenthesized expression?
 A - on the next line:
 first-second
 Is this first - second —an infix subtraction—or two expression statements,
 one for first and one to negate second?
 And now you know why Python’s lambda
 only allows a single expression body.
In all of these, either treating the newline as a separator or not would both produce
 valid code, but possibly not the code the user wants. Across languages, there is an
 unsettling variety of rules they use to decide which newlines are separators. Here are a
 couple:
 Lua completely ignores newlines, but carefully controls its grammar such that no
 separator between statements is needed at all in most cases. This is perfectly legit:
 a = 1 b = 2
 Lua avoids the return problem by requiring a return statement to be the very
 last statement in a block. If there is a value a"er return before the keyword
 end, it must be for the return. For the other two cases, they allow an explicit ;
 and expect users to use that. In practice, that almost never happens because
 there’s no point in a parenthesized or unary negation expression statement.
 Go handles newlines in the scanner. If a newline appears following one of a handful
 of token types that are known to potentially end a statement, the newline is
 treated like a semicolon, otherwise it is ignored. The Go team provides a canonical
 code formatter, gofmt, and the ecosystem is fervent about its use, which ensures
 that idiomatic styled code works well with this simple rule.
 Python treats all newlines as significant unless an explicit backslash is used at the
 end of a line to continue it to the next line. However, newlines anywhere inside a
 pair of brackets ((), [], or {}) are ignored. Idiomatic style strongly prefers the
 latter.
 This rule works well for Python because it is a highly statement-oriented language.
 In particular, Python’s grammar ensures a statement never appears inside an
 expression. C does the same, but many other languages which have a “lambda” or
 function literal syntax do not.
 For example, in JavaScript:
 console.log(function() {
 statement();
 });
 Here, the console.log() expression contains a function literal which in turn
 contains the statement statement();.
 Python would need a di!erent set of rules for implicitly joining lines if you could
 get back into a statement where newlines should become meaningful while still
 nested inside brackets.
 JavaScript’s “automatic semicolon insertion” rule is the real odd one. Where other
 languages assume most newlines are meaningful and only a few should be ignored
 in multi-line statements, JS assumes the opposite. It treats all of your newlines as
 meaningless whitespace unless it encounters a parse error. If it does, it goes back
 and tries turning the previous newline into a semicolon to get something
 grammatically valid.
This design note would turn into a design diatribe if I went into complete detail
 about how that even works, much less all the various ways that JavaScript’s
 “solution” is a bad idea. It’s a mess. JavaScript is the only language I know where
 many style guides demand explicit semicolons a"er every statement even though
 the language theoretically lets you elide them.
 If you’re designing a new language, you almost surely should avoid an explicit
 statement terminator. Programmers are creatures of fashion like other humans and
 semicolons are as passé as ALL CAPS KEYWORDS. Just make sure you pick a set of
 rules that make sense for your language’s particular grammar and idioms. And don’t
 do what JavaScript did.
 NEXT CHAPTER: “REPRESENTING CODE” →
 Hand-cra"ed by Robert Nystrom — © 2015 – 2020
5
 Representing Code
 To dwellers in a wood, almost every species of
 tree has its voice as well as its feature.
 “ ”
 — Thomas Hardy, Under the Greenwood Tree
 In the last chapter, we took the raw source code as a string and transformed it
 into a slightly higher-level representation: a series of tokens. The parser we’ll
 write in the next chapter takes those tokens and transforms them yet again to an
 even richer, more complex representation.
 Before we can produce that representation, we need to define it. That’s the
 subject of this chapter. Along the way, we’ll cover some theory around formal
 grammars, feel the difference between functional and object-oriented
 programming, go over a couple of design patterns, and do some
 metaprogramming.
 Before we do all that, let’s focus on the main goal—a representation for code. It
 should be simple for the parser to produce and easy for the interpreter to
 consume. If you haven’t written a parser or interpreter yet, those requirements
 aren’t exactly illuminating. Maybe your intuition can help. What is your brain
 doing when you play the part of a human interpreter? How do you mentally
 evaluate an arithmetic expression like this:
 1 + 2 * 3 - 4
 Because you understand the order of operations—the old “Please Excuse My
 Dear Aunt Sally” stuff—you know that the multiplication is evaluated before
 the addition or subtraction. One way to visualize that precedence is using a tree.
 Leaf nodes are numbers, and interior nodes are operators with branches for
 each of their operands.
 In order to evaluate an arithmetic node, you need to know the numeric values
 of its subtrees, so you have to evaluate those first. That means working your
 way from the leaves up to the root—a post-order traversal:
 I was so worried about this being one of the
 most boring chapters in the book that I kept
 stuffing more fun ideas into it until I ran out
 of room.
 A. Starting with the full tree, evaluate the
 bottom-most operation, 2 * 3.
 B. Now we can evaluate the +.
 C. Next, the -.
 D. The final answer.
That’s not to say a tree is the only possible
 representation of our code. In Part III, we’ll
 generate bytecode, another representation
 that isn’t as human friendly but is closer to
 the machine.
 If I gave you an arithmetic expression, you could draw one of these trees pretty
 easily. Given a tree, you can evaluate it without breaking a sweat. So it
 intuitively seems like a workable representation of our code is a tree that
 matches the grammatical structure—the operator nesting—of the language.
 We need to get more precise about what that grammar is then. Like lexical
 grammars in the last chapter, there is a long ton of theory around syntactic
 grammars. We’re going into that theory a little more than we did when scanning
 because it turns out to be a useful tool throughout much of the interpreter. We
 start by moving one level up the Chomsky hierarchy…
 Context-Free Grammars
 5 . 1
 In the last chapter, the formalism we used for defining the lexical
 grammar—the rules for how characters get grouped into tokens—was called a
 regular language. That was fine for our scanner, which emits a flat sequence of
 tokens. But regular languages aren’t powerful enough to handle expressions
 which can nest arbitrarily deeply.
 We need a bigger hammer, and that hammer is a context-free grammar (CFG).
 It’s the next heaviest tool in the toolbox of formal grammars. A formal
 grammar takes a set of atomic pieces it calls its “alphabet”. Then it defines a
 (usually infinite) set of “strings” that are “in” the grammar. Each string is a
 sequence of “letters” in the alphabet.
 I’m using all those quotes because the terms get a little confusing as you move
 from lexical to syntactic grammars. In our scanner’s grammar, the alphabet
 consists of individual characters and the strings are the valid lexemes—roughly
 “words”. In the syntactic grammar we’re talking about now, we’re at a different
 level of granularity. Now each “letter” in the alphabet is an entire token and a
 “string” is a sequence of tokens—an entire expression.
 Oof. Maybe a table will help:
 Terminology
 Lexical grammar
 Syntactic grammar
 The “alphabet” is…
 → Characters
 Tokens
 A “string” is…
 → Lexeme or token
 Expression
 It's implemented by the…
 → Scanner
 Parser
 A formal grammar’s job is to specify which strings are valid and which aren’t. If
 we were defining a grammar for English sentences, “eggs are tasty for breakfast”
would be in the grammar, but “tasty breakfast for are eggs” would probably not.
 Rules for grammars
 5 . 1 . 1
 How do we write down a grammar that contains an infinite number of valid
 strings? We obviously can’t list them all out. Instead, we create a finite set of
 rules. You can think of them as a game that you can “play” in one of two
 directions.
 If you start with the rules, you can use them to generate strings that are in the
 grammar. Strings created this way are called derivations because each is
 “derived” from the rules of the grammar. In each step of the game, you pick a
 rule and follow what it tells you to do. Most of the lingo around formal
 grammars comes from playing them in this direction. Rules are called
 productions because they produce strings in the grammar.
 Each production in a context-free grammar has a head—its name—and a body
 which describes what it generates. In its pure form, the body is simply a list of
 symbols. Symbols come in two delectable flavors:
 A terminal is a letter from the grammar’s alphabet. You can think of it like a
 literal value. In the syntactic grammar we’re defining, the terminals are
 individual lexemes—tokens coming from the scanner like if or 1234.
 These are called “terminals”, in the sense of an “end point” because they don’t
 lead to any further “moves” in the game. You simply produce that one
 symbol.
 A nonterminal is a named reference to another rule in the grammar. It
 means “play that rule and insert whatever it produces here”. In this way, the
 grammar composes.
 There is one last refinement: you may have multiple rules with the same name.
 When you reach a nonterminal with that name, you are allowed to pick any of
 the rules for it, whichever floats your boat.
 To make this concrete, we need a way to write down these production rules.
 People have been trying to crystallize grammar all the way back to Pāṇini’s
 Ashtadhyayi, which codified Sanskrit grammar a mere couple thousand years
 ago. Not much progress happened until John Backus and company needed a
 notation for specifying ALGOL 58 and came up with Backus-Naur form. Since
 then, nearly everyone uses some flavor of BNF, tweaked to their own tastes.
 I tried to come up with something clean. Each rule is a name, followed by an
 arrow (→), followed by a sequence of symbols, and finally ending with a
 semicolon (;). Terminals are quoted strings, and nonterminals are lowercase
 words.
 Restricting heads to a single symbol is a
 defining feature of context-free grammars.
 More powerful formalisms like unrestricted
 grammars allow a sequence of symbols in
 the head as well as in the body.
 Yes, we need to define a syntax to use for the
 rules that define our syntax. Should we
 specify that metasyntax too? What notation do
 we use for it? It’s languages all the way down!
 Yes, I really am going to be using breakfast
 examples throughout this entire book. Sorry.
 Using that, here’s a grammar for breakfast menus:
breakfast  → protein "with" breakfast "on the side" ;
 breakfast  → protein ;
 breakfast  → bread ;
 protein    
protein    
protein    
→ crispiness "crispy" "bacon" ;
 → "sausage" ;
 → cooked "eggs" ;
 crispiness → "really" ;
 crispiness → "really" crispiness ;
 cooked     
cooked     
cooked     
bread      
bread      
bread      
→ "scrambled" ;
 → "poached" ;
 → "fried" ;
 → "toast" ;
 → "biscuits" ;
 → "English muffin" ;
 We can use this grammar to generate random breakfasts. Let’s play a round and
 see how it works. By age-old convention, the game starts with the first rule in
 the grammar, here breakfast. There are three productions for that, and we
 randomly pick the first one. Our resulting string looks like:
 protein "with" breakfast "on the side"
 We need to expand that first nonterminal, protein, so we pick a production
 for that. Let’s pick:
 protein → cooked "eggs" ;
 Next, we need a production for cooked, and so we pick "poached". That’s a
 terminal, so we add that. Now our string looks like:
 "poached" "eggs" "with" breakfast "on the side"
 The next non-terminal is breakfast again. The first breakfast production
 we chose recursively refers back to the breakfast rule. Recursion like this
 usually indicates that the language is context-free instead of regular. In
 particular, this kind of nested recursion where the recursive nonterminal has
 productions on both sides of it means that it’s not regular.
 We could keep picking the first production for breakfast over and over again
 yielding all manner of breakfasts like “bacon with sausage with scrambled eggs
 with bacon …”. We won’t though. This time we’ll pick bread. There are three
 rules for that, each of which contains only a terminal. We’ll pick “English
 muffin”.
 With that, every nonterminal in the string has been expanded until it finally
 contains only terminals and we’re left with:
 Imagine that we’ve recursively expanded the
 breakfast rule here several times, like
 “bacon with bacon with bacon with bacon
 …”. In order to complete the string, we’ll need
 to add an equal number of “on the side” bits to
 the end. Keeping track of that number of
 trailing parts is beyond the capabilities of a
 simple regular grammar. A regular grammar
 can repeat, but it can’t count.
Throw in some ham and Hollandaise, and you’ve got eggs Benedict.
 Any time we hit a rule that had multiple productions, we just picked one
 arbitrarily. It is this flexibility that allows a short number of grammar rules to
 encode a combinatorially larger set of strings. The fact that a rule can refer to
 itself—directly or indirectly—kicks it up even more, letting us pack an infinite
 number of strings into a finite grammar.
 

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot

Saiyan Saga
Frieza Saga
Garlic Jr. Saga
Androids Saga
Majin Buu Saga
Production and broadcasting

English dub production and broadcasting
Dragon Ball Z Kai
English dub production and broadcasting
Editing
Music
Related media

Home media
Kai
Manga
Films
Television specials and original video animations
Video games
Reception

Cultural impact and legacy
Ratings
Merchandise
Notes
References
Further reading
External links
Dragon Ball Z

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Page semi-protected
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For the video game series, see Dragon Ball Z (video game).
Dragon Ball Z

ドラゴンボールＺ
(Doragon Bōru Zetto)
Genre	
Adventure[1]
Fantasy comedy[1]
Martial arts[2]
Created by	Akira Toriyama
Anime television series
Directed by	
Daisuke Nishio
Shigeyasu Yamauchi
Produced by	
Kenji Shimizu
Kōji Kaneda
Written by	Takao Koyama
Music by	Shunsuke Kikuchi
Studio	Toei Animation
Licensed by	
Crunchyroll, LLC
(formerly known as Funimation)
Original network	FNS (Fuji TV)
English network	
CA: YTV[3]
IN: Cartoon Network[4]
UK: Cartoon Network, CNX, Toonami
US: First-run syndication, International Channel, Cartoon Network (Toonami)
Original run	April 26, 1989 – January 31, 1996
Episodes	291 (List of episodes)
Anime television series
Dragon Ball Z Kai
Directed by	
Yasuhiro Nowatari
Naohiro Terazaki
Written by	Takao Koyama
Music by	
Kenji Yamamoto
Shunsuke Kikuchi
Norihito Sumitomo
Studio	Toei Animation
Licensed by	Crunchyroll[Note 1]
Original network	Fuji TV
English network	
IN: Cartoon Network[5]
UK: Kix
US: Nicktoons, The CW (Toonzai/Vortexx), Adult Swim (Toonami)
Original run	April 5, 2009 – March 27, 2011
Continued run:
April 6, 2014 – June 28, 2015
Episodes	
159 (Japan)
167 (International)[6]
(List of episodes)
Media franchise
Dragon Ball (manga)
List of all Dragon Ball series
List of all Dragon Ball films
List of all Dragon Ball video games
List of all Dragon Ball soundtracks
icon Anime and manga portal
Dragon Ball Z[a] (DBZ) is a Japanese anime television series produced by Toei Animation. Part of the Dragon Ball media franchise, it is the sequel to the 1986 Dragon Ball television series and adapts the latter 325 chapters of the original Dragon Ball manga series created by Akira Toriyama. The series aired in Japan on Fuji TV from April 1989 to January 1996 and was later dubbed for broadcast in at least 81 countries worldwide.[7]

Dragon Ball Z continues the adventures of Son Goku in his adult life as he and his companions defend the Earth against villains including aliens (Vegeta, Frieza), androids (Cell), and magical creatures (Majin Buu). At the same time, the story follows the life of Goku's son, Gohan, as well as the development of his rivals, Piccolo and Vegeta.

Due to the success of the series in the United States, the manga chapters making up its story were initially released by Viz Media under the Dragon Ball Z title. The anime's popularity has also spawned various media and merchandise that has come to represent the majority of the material within the Dragon Ball franchise, including films, home video releases, soundtracks, trading cards, and video games. Dragon Ball Z remains a cultural icon through numerous adaptations and re-releases, including a remastered broadcast titled Dragon Ball Z Kai.[b]

Dragon Ball Z has since been followed by a sequel series titled Dragon Ball GT (1996–1997), a "midquel" series titled Dragon Ball Super (2015–2018) and another midquel series titled Dragon Ball Daima (2024–2025).

Plot
Saiyan Saga
Dragon Ball Z picks up five years after the end of the Dragon Ball series, with Son Goku now a young adult and father to his son, Gohan.

A humanoid alien named Raditz arrives on Earth in a spacecraft and tracks down Goku, revealing to him that he is his long-lost older brother and that they are members of a near-extinct elite alien warrior race called Saiyans (サイヤ人, Saiya-jin). Goku (originally named Kakarot (カカロット, Kakarotto) had been sent to Earth as an infant to conquer the planet, but suffered a severe blow to his head shortly after his arrival and lost all memory of his mission, as well as his blood-thirsty Saiyan nature.

Raditz tells Goku that along with two stronger elites, Vegeta and Nappa, they are the only remaining Saiyans after their home planet Vegeta was destroyed. Raditz asks Goku to enlist in helping conquering planets and joining the remaining Saiyans. When Goku refuses to join and help them, Raditz takes Goku and Krillin down with one strike, kidnaps Gohan, and threatens to murder him if Goku does not kill 100 humans within the next 24 hours. Goku decides to team up with his arch-enemy Piccolo, who was also defeated by Raditz in an earlier encounter, to defeat him and save his son. During the battle, Gohan's rage momentarily makes him stronger than Piccolo and Goku as he attacks Raditz to protect his father. The battle ends with Goku restraining Raditz so that Piccolo can hit them with a deadly move called Special Beam Cannon (魔貫光殺砲, Makankōsappō, lit. "Demon Penetrating, Killing Ray Gun"), mortally wounding them both, and kills them after a short while. But before Raditz succumbs to his injuries, he reveals to Piccolo that the other two Saiyans are much stronger than him and will come for the Dragon Balls in one year.

Having witnessed Gohan's latent potential, Piccolo takes him into the wild to train for the upcoming battle against the Saiyans. In the afterlife, Goku travels the million-kilometer Snake Way so that he can train under the ruler of the North Galaxy, King Kai. King Kai teaches Goku the Kaio-ken (界王拳, Kaiōken, lit. "Fist of Kings of Worlds") and the Spirit Bomb (元気玉, Genki Dama, lit. "Energy Sphere") techniques. Despite his gruff and villainous nature, Piccolo grows fond of Gohan while he oversees him learning to fend for himself. This forges an unlikely emotional bond between the two.

After a year, Goku is revived with the Dragon Balls, but King Kai panics as he realizes that Goku will have to take Snake Way again to get back and will not make it until hours after the Saiyans arrive. Goku's allies group up to fight until Goku gets back, but prove to be no match for Nappa and the "Prince of All Saiyans", Vegeta. Yamcha, Tien Shinhan, Chiaotzu and Piccolo all perish in the battle, with Piccolo's death causing both Kami and the Dragon Balls to fade from existence. When Goku finally arrives at the battlefield, he avenges his fallen friends by easily defeating Nappa before crippling him by breaking his spine in half. A furious Vegeta then executes Nappa for his failure to kill Goku.

Goku uses several grades of the Kaio-ken to win the first clash with Vegeta, which concludes with a climactic ki beam struggle, but it comes at a great cost to his body. Vegeta comes back and creates an artificial moon to transform into a Great Ape, which he uses to torture Goku. Krillin and Gohan sense that Goku is in trouble, and they return for a group fight with the now-seemingly unstoppable Vegeta. They are aided at key moments by Yajirobe, who cuts Vegeta's tail to revert him into his normal state. Goku gives Krillin a Spirit Bomb that he made, and Krillin uses it to severely damage Vegeta. Vegeta is ultimately defeated when he is crushed by Gohan's Great Ape form, and he retreats to his spaceship as Krillin approaches to finish him off. Goku convinces Krillin to spare Vegeta's life and allow him to escape Earth, with Vegeta vowing to return and destroy the planet in revenge for his humiliation at Goku's hands.

Frieza Saga
During the battle, Krillin overhears Vegeta mentioning the original set of Dragon Balls from Piccolo's homeworld, Namek (ナメック星, Namekku-sei). While Goku recovers from his injuries, Gohan, Krillin, and Goku's oldest friend Bulma depart for Namek to use these Dragon Balls to revive their fallen friends in the battle.

Upon their arrival on Namek, Krillin, Gohan, and Bulma discover that Vegeta and his superior, the galactic tyrant Frieza, are already there, each looking to use the Dragon Balls to obtain immortality. Vegeta is stronger than before, as Saiyans become stronger when they recover from the brink of death, so he seizes the opportunity to rebel against Frieza. A triangular game of cat-and-mouse ensues, with Frieza, Vegeta, and Gohan plus Krillin alternately possessing one or more of the Dragon Balls, with no one managing to possess all seven at any given time.

Vegeta manages to isolate Frieza's lieutenants one by one and kill them. When Frieza sees that Vegeta is posing too big of a problem, he summons the Ginyu Force, a team of elite mercenaries led by Captain Ginyu, who can switch bodies with his opponents. Vegeta reluctantly teams up with Gohan and Krillin to fight them, knowing that they are too much for him to handle alone. The Ginyu Force proves too powerful, but Goku finally arrives and defeats them single-handedly, saving Vegeta, Gohan, and Krillin. Vegeta believes Goku may have become the legendary warrior of the Saiyans, the Super Saiyan (超スーパーサイヤ人, Sūpā Saiya-jin). As Goku heals from a brutal fight with Captain Ginyu, Krillin, Dende, and Gohan secretly use the Dragon Balls behind Vegeta's back to wish for Piccolo's resurrection and teleport him to Namek. Vegeta finds them using the Dragon Balls without him, but the Grand Elder dies and rendering the Dragon Balls inert before he can wish for immortality. Just as this happens, Frieza arrives and decides to kill the four of them for denying him his wish for immortality.

Piccolo arrives on Namek but is accidentally separated from the others due to a badly-worded wish. He finds the strongest Namekian warrior, Nail, who was defeated by Frieza and fuses with him to greatly increase his power.

Despite both Piccolo and Vegeta's advances in power, they are greatly outclassed by Frieza, who goes through several transformations before reaching his final form, which he then uses to kill Dende.

Goku arrives after healing from his injuries, and Vegeta tells him that Frieza was the one who destroyed the Saiyan homeworld and massacred the Saiyan race, as he feared that he would one day be overthrown by a Super Saiyan. Frieza then kills Vegeta in front of Goku.

Though Goku's power exceeds Vegeta's, he is still no match for Frieza. Goku uses his last resort, a massive Spirit Bomb with the energy of Namek and the surrounding worlds, and it seemingly defeats the tyrant. However, Frieza manages to survive, and he unleashes his wrath upon the group by gravely wounding Piccolo and murdering Krillin. Goku's rage finally erupts, and he undergoes a strange transformation that turns his hair blond, his eyes green, and causes a golden aura to radiate from his body. Goku has finally become a Super Saiyan.

Meanwhile, the revived Kami uses Earth's Dragon Balls to resurrect everyone on Namek that was killed by Frieza and his henchmen, which also allows the Grand Elder to be resurrected for a short time, and the Namekian Dragon to return. Dende uses the final wish to teleport everyone on Namek to Earth except for Goku and Frieza.

Even at 100% power, Frieza cannot manage to defeat the Super Saiyan transformation. Goku outwits Frieza, cutting him in half with his own attack, before escaping Namek as the planet is destroyed in a massive explosion.

Garlic Jr. Saga
After the battle with Frieza, Goku's friends and family are waiting for word on his return when a demonic star drifts into Earth's orbit and opens up a rift in space, allowing the malevolent immortal Garlic Jr. to break free from his imprisonment inside the Dead Zone. Seeking revenge for a past defeat at the hands of Goku and Piccolo, Garlic Jr. traps Kami and Mr. Popo inside a bottle and uses his Black Water Mist to turn all of Earth's inhabitants into bloodthirsty, vampire-like beings. Gohan, Krillin, Piccolo, Krillin's then-girlfriend Maron, and Gohan's pet dragon Icarus are the only ones unaffected and set out to stop Garlic Jr. and restore the Earth and its inhabitants. This proves to be easier said than done, as Garlic Jr. has complete immortality, making him impossible to kill. Luckily, Gohan's hidden potential gives him the edge he needs to eradicate Garlic Jr.'s forces and send him back into the Dead Zone. He also destroys the star, ensuring that Garlic Jr. will remain trapped in the Dead Zone for all eternity.

Androids Saga
One year later, Frieza is revealed to have survived and arrives on Earth with his father, King Cold, seeking revenge. However, a mysterious young man named Trunks appears, transforms into a Super Saiyan, and kills Frieza and King Cold. Goku returns a few hours later, having spent the past year on the alien planet Yardrat learning a new technique: Instant Transmission, which allows him to teleport to any location he desires. Trunks reveals privately to Goku that he is the son of Vegeta and Bulma, and has traveled from 17 years in the future to warn Goku that two Androids (人造人間, Jinzōningen, lit. "Artificial Humans") created by Dr. Gero will appear in three years to seek revenge against Goku for destroying the Red Ribbon Army when he was a child. Trunks says all of Goku's friends will fall to them - while Goku himself will die from a heart virus six months before their arrival.

Trunks gives Goku medicine from the future that will save him from the heart virus and departs back to his own time. When the androids arrive, Goku falls ill during his fight with Android 19 but is saved by Vegeta, who reveals that he has also achieved the Super Saiyan transformation. Vegeta and Piccolo easily defeat Android 19 and Dr. Gero (who turned himself into "Android 20"), but Trunks returns from the future to check on their progress and reveals that the androids they defeated are not the ones that killed all of them in the future.

Goku is out of commission and his allies are overwhelmed by the arrival of Androids 16, 17 and 18, while an even stronger bio-Android called Cell emerges from a different timeline and embarks on a quest to find and absorb Androids 17 and 18, allowing him to attain his "perfect form".

Cell successfully absorbs Android 17, becoming considerably more powerful, but Vegeta returns to the battle, having greatly elevated his power, and easily overpowers him. However, Vegeta allows Cell to absorb Android 18, believing that his "perfect form" will be no match for his Super Saiyan power. Vegeta is subsequently defeated, with Cell mockingly thanking him for helping him achieve perfection.

Cell allows everyone to live for the time being and announces a fighting tournament to decide the fate of the Earth, known as the "Cell Games". Goku, recovered from the heart virus and having reached the zenith of the Super Saiyan form, takes on Cell at the tournament. Goku eventually realizes that Cell is far too powerful for him to handle, and forfeits the fight to the astonishment of everyone else. Goku proclaims that Gohan will be able to defeat Cell. Though initially outclassed, Gohan is eventually able to tap into his latent power and achieve the Super Saiyan 2 transformation after Android 16 sacrifices himself in a failed attempt to kill Cell. Refusing to accept defeat, Cell prepares to self-destruct and destroy the Earth.

Goku uses his Instant Transmission ability to teleport himself and Cell to King Kai's planet, where Cell explodes and kills everyone there. However, Cell survives the blast and returns to Earth more powerful than ever, where he promptly murders Trunks, but Gohan unleashes the totality of his power in a massive Kamehameha wave and obliterates Cell for good.

The Dragon Balls are then used to revive everyone that was killed by Cell, while Goku chooses to remain in the afterlife, refusing an offer by his friends to use the Namekian Dragon Balls to bring him back. Trunks returns to his timeline and uses his bolstered power to finally slay the Future Androids and Cell.

Majin Buu Saga
Seven years later, Goku is allowed to go back to Earth for one day to reunite with his loved ones and meet his youngest son, Goten, at the World Martial Arts Tournament (天下一武道会, Tenkaichi Budōkai, "Number One Martial Arts Gathering Under the Heavens"). Soon after, Goku and his allies are drawn into a fight by the Supreme Kai against a magical being named Majin Buu (魔人ブウ, "Majin Buu") summoned by the evil wizard Babidi. All efforts to stop the resurrection prove to be futile as Buu is successfully revived and begins slaughtering Earth's inhabitants. Goten and Trunks are taught the fusion technique by Piccolo, while Gohan gets his latent potential unlocked by the Elder Supreme Kai.

Meanwhile, Buu befriends Mr. Satan and vows to never kill anyone ever again, but is interrupted when a deranged gunman shoots and nearly kills Mr. Satan. As a result, Majin Buu becomes so angry that he expels the evil within himself, creating an evil Buu that proceeds to absorb the good Buu. The result is Super Buu, a psychopathic monster who wants nothing more than the destruction of the universe. After numerous battles that result in the deaths of many of Goku's allies as well as the destruction of Earth, Goku is fully restored by the Elder Supreme Kai and defeats Kid Buu (the original form of Majin Buu) with a Spirit Bomb attack containing the energy of all the inhabitants of Earth, who were resurrected along with the planet by the Namekian Dragon Balls. Goku makes a wish for Kid Buu to be reincarnated as a good person and, ten years later at another Tenkaichi Budōkai, he meets Kid Buu's human reincarnation, Uub. Leaving the match between them unfinished, Goku departs with Uub so he can train him to become Earth's new defender.

Production and broadcasting
Further information: List of Dragon Ball Z episodes
Kazuhiko Torishima, Akira Toriyama's editor for Dr. Slump and the first half of Dragon Ball, felt that the Dragon Ball anime's ratings were gradually declining because it had the same producer that worked on Dr. Slump. Torishima said this producer had this "cute and funny" image connected to Toriyama's work and was missing the more serious tone in the newer series, and therefore asked the studio to change the producer. Impressed with their work on Saint Seiya, he asked its director Kōzō Morishita and writer Takao Koyama to help "reboot" Dragon Ball, which coincided with Goku growing up. The new producer explained that ending the first anime and creating a new one would result in more promotional money. The result was the start of Dragon Ball Z.[8] Toriyama suggested the title because Z is the last letter of the alphabet. He wanted to finish the series because he was running out of ideas for it.[9] Ironically enough, the sequel series would end up producing more episodes than its predecessor.

Dragon Ball Z is adapted from the final 324 chapters of the manga series which were published in Weekly Shōnen Jump from 1988 to 1995. It premiered in Japan on Fuji Television on April 26, 1989, taking over its predecessor's time slot, and ran for 291 episodes until its conclusion on January 31, 1996.[10] Because Toriyama was writing the manga during the production of the anime,[11] Dragon Ball Z added original material not adapted from the manga, including lengthening scenes or adding new ones, and adding new attacks and characters not present in the manga. For example, Toriyama was asked to create an additional character for Goku's training with King Kai, resulting in the cricket Gregory.[12]

Throughout the production, the voice actors were tasked with playing different characters and performing their lines on cue, switching between roles as necessary.[13] The voice actors were unable to record the lines separately because of the close dialogue timing. When asked if juggling the different voices of Goku, Gohan and Goten were difficult, Masako Nozawa said that it was not and that she was able to switch roles simply upon seeing the character's picture.[13] She did admit that when they were producing two films a year and television specials in addition to the regular series, there were times when they had only line art to look at while recording, which made giving finer nuanced details in her performance difficult.[14]

One of the character designers for Dragon Ball Z was Tadayoshi Yamamuro. He was responsible for designing and animating Goku's Super Saiyan form in the series. He used the martial artist Bruce Lee as a reference for Goku's Super Saiyan form, stating that, when he "first becomes a Super Saiyan, his slanting pose with that scowling look in his eyes is all Bruce Lee."[15] In the original manga itself, Goku's piercing eyes in Super Saiyan form were also based on Bruce Lee's paralyzing glare.[16]

English dub production and broadcasting
In 1996, Funimation Productions (now known as Crunchyroll LLC) licensed Dragon Ball Z for an English-language release in North America, after cancelling their initial dub of Dragon Ball half-way through their originally-planned 26-episode first season.[17][18] Funimation's 1996 release was not the first broadcast in the United States, as some networks had already aired versions of the series in other languages on a smaller scale. This included Nippon Golden Network's broadcast of a subtitled Japanese version in Hawaii from 1994.[19] Funimation worked with Saban Entertainment to syndicate the series on television, and Pioneer Entertainment to handle home video distribution.[20] A Vancouver-based cast recording at the Ocean Studios were hired by Funimation to dub the anime (Funimation had previously used a similar Vancouver-based voice cast in their initial Dragon Ball dub, recorded at Dick & Roger's Sound Studio).[21][22] Contract musicians for Saban, Ron Wasserman[23] and Jeremy Sweet,[21] known for their work on the Power Rangers franchise, composed a new guitar-driven soundtrack. The dub's opening theme (nicknamed "Rock the Dragon") was sung by Sweet, and afterwards Wasserman got hired by Saban to do background music for the dub. For contractual reasons, the background music and opening theme was officially credited to Saban founders Shuki Levy and Haim Saban (under the alias Kussa Mahehi), with the actual extent of their involvement in the soundtrack being unclear.[24][25]

Funimation's initial English dub of Dragon Ball Z had mandated cuts to content and length, which reduced the first 67 episodes into 53 (though TV episode 53 actually ends half-way through uncut episode 67).[26][27] Most of the edits were done to make the anime more tame and kid-friendly, most notably having references to death sidestepped with phrases like "sent to the next dimension".[28] It premiered in the United States on September 13, 1996, in first-run syndication, but halted production in 1998 after two seasons[26] despite strong ratings.[29] This was due to Saban scaling down its syndication operations, in order to focus on producing original material for the Fox Kids Network and its newly acquired Fox Family Channel.[30][31] Pioneer also ceased its home video release of the series at volume 17 (the end of the dub) and retained the rights to produce an uncut subtitled version,[26] but did not do so. They did, however, release uncut dubs of the first three Z movies on home video.


Christopher Sabat (left) and Sean Schemmel (right) have provided Funimation's English dub voices for Vegeta and Goku, respectively, since 1999.
On August 31, 1998, reruns of this canceled dub began airing on Cartoon Network as part of the channel's weekday afternoon Toonami block. Cartoon Network eventually ordered more episodes of Dragon Ball Z, and Funimation resumed production on the series' English dub without Saban's assistance. Cartoon Network replaced the original Vancouver-based cast with an in-house voice cast at their Texas-based studio, with the goal of the new voices sounding similar to the Vancouver cast.[32] The Saban-produced soundtrack from the first two seasons was replaced with a new background score composed by Bruce Faulconer and his team of musicians, which was used throughout the rest of Funimation's Dragon Ball Z dub.[23] This renewed dub featured less censorship due to both Saban's absence and fewer restrictions on cable programming, and aired new episodes on Cartoon Network's Toonami block from September 13, 1999, to April 7, 2003 (continuing in re-runs through 2008). Kids' WB briefly ran Dragon Ball Z in 2001 on its short-lived Toonami block.[33]

In 2005, Funimation began to re-dub episodes 1–67 with their in-house voice cast, including content originally cut from their dub with Saban.[34] This dub's background score was composed by Nathan M. Johnson (Funimation had ceased working with Faulconer Productions after the final episode of Dragon Ball Z in 2003). Funimation's new uncut dub of these episodes aired on Cartoon Network beginning in June 2005.[35][36][37] Funimation's later remastered DVDs of the series saw them redub portions of the dialogue, mostly after episode 67, and had the option to play the entire series' dub with both the American and Japanese background music.

In January 2011, Funimation and Toei announced that they would stream Dragon Ball Z within 30 minutes before their simulcast of One Piece.[38]

The Funimation dubbed episodes also aired in Canada, Ireland, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Belgium, Australia, and New Zealand. However, beginning with episode 108 (123 uncut), Westwood Media (in association with Ocean Studios) produced an alternate English dub, distributed to Europe by AB Groupe. The alternate dub was created for broadcast in the UK, the Netherlands and Ireland, although it also aired in Canada beginning from episode 168 (183 uncut) to fulfill Canadian content requirements. Funimation's in-house dub continued to air in the U.S., Australia, and New Zealand. The Westwood Media production used the same voice cast from the original 53-episode dub produced by Funimation, it featured an alternate soundtrack by Tom Keenlyside and John Mitchell,[39] though most of this score was pieces Ocean reused from other productions Keenlyside and Mitchell had scored for them, and it used the same scripts and video master as the TV edit of Funimation's in-house dub. The Westwood Media dub never received a home video release. In Australia, Dragon Ball Z was broadcast by the free-to-air commercial network, Network 10 during morning children's programming, Cheez TV, originally using the censored Funimation/Saban dub before switching to Funimation's in-house dub. Dragon Ball Z originally aired on the British Comedy Network in Fall 1998.[40]

The series was also available on the Funimation video streaming service (formerly FunimationNOW) upon its launch in 2016. In March 2022, Dragon Ball Z was added to Crunchyroll, a service that Funimation acquired a year before, which in turn was acquired in 2018 by its current parent company, Sony Pictures Television.[41]

Dragon Ball Z Kai
See also: List of Dragon Ball Z Kai episodes
In February 2009, Toei Animation announced that it would begin broadcasting a remastered version of Dragon Ball Z as part of the series's 20th anniversary celebrations.[42] The series premiered on Fuji TV in Japan on April 5, 2009, under the title Dragon Ball Kai. The ending suffix Kai (改かい) in the name means "updated" or "altered" and reflects the improvements and corrections of the original work.[43] The original footage was remastered for HDTV, featuring updated opening and ending sequences, new music, and a re-recording of the vocal tracks.[43][44] The original material and any damaged frames were removed, along with the majority of the filler episodes to more closely follow the manga, resulting in a faster-moving story.[45] According to Torishima, Kai was conceived when Bandai asked if a new Dragon Ball anime could be made to increase the franchise's merchandise sales. As Toriyama refused to create a new story, it was decided to release a remastered version of the Dragon Ball Z anime that more closely follows the manga instead. He said the reception to Kai was positive, "so it all worked out".[46]

The series initially concluded on its 97th episode in Japan on March 27, 2011, with the finale of the Cell saga. It was originally planned to run 98 episodes; however, due to the Tōhoku offshore earthquake and tsunami, the final episode was not aired and was later released direct-to-video in Japan on August 2, 2011.[47]

In November 2012, Mayumi Tanaka, the Japanese voice actor of Krillin announced that she and the rest of the cast were recording more episodes of Dragon Ball Kai.[48] In February 2014, the Kai adaptation of the Majin Buu saga was officially confirmed. The new run of the series, which is titled Dragon Ball Z Kai: The Final Chapters internationally, began airing in Japan on Fuji TV on April 6, 2014, and ended its run on June 28, 2015.[49] The final arc of Kai was originally produced to last 69 episodes (as most of the international versions run[clarification needed]),[50] but the Japanese broadcast cut it down to 61 episodes.

English dub production and broadcasting
Funimation licensed Kai for an English-language release in February 2010. The series was initially broadcast in the U.S. on Nicktoons from May 24, 2010, to January 1, 2012, continuing in re-runs until April 2013.[51][52] In addition to Nicktoons, the series also began airing on the 4Kids-owned Saturday morning programming block Toonzai on The CW in August 2010,[53] then on its successor, the Saban-owned Vortexx, beginning in August 2012 until the block ended in September 2014.[49] Both the Nicktoons and CW airings were edited for content. Kai began airing uncut on Adult Swim's Toonami block on November 8, 2014,[54] and re-runs of the previous weeks' episodes aired at the beginning of Adult Swim from February 2015 to June 2016.[55] In the United Kingdom, CSC Media Group acquired the broadcast rights to Kai and began airing it on Kix! in early 2013.[56][57][58]

Despite Kai's continuation not being officially confirmed at the time even in Japan, Funimation voice actors Sean Schemmel (Goku) and Kyle Hebert (Gohan), announced in April 2013 that they had started recording an English dub for new episodes.[59] In November 2013, Kai's Australasian distributor Madman Entertainment revealed that the Majin Buu arc of Kai would be released in 2014 and that they were waiting on dubs to be finished.[60] In February 2014, Funimation officially stated that they had not yet started recording a dub for the final arc of Kai.[61] On December 6, 2016, Funimation announced the continuation of Kai would begin airing on Adult Swim's Toonami block. The series aired from January 7, 2017, to June 23, 2018, alongside Dragon Ball Super.[62]

An alternate English dub of Kai by Ocean Productions was recorded for the original 98 episodes, featuring many of the original Vancouver cast reprising their roles, but it has yet to air.[when?][63][64][65][66]

Editing
Dragon Ball Z's original North American release was the subject of heavy editing which resulted in a large amount of removed content and alterations that greatly changed the original work. Funimation CEO Gen Fukunaga is often criticized for his role in the editing; but it was the initial distributor Saban which required such changes or they would not air the work, as was the case with the episode dealing with orphans.[67][Note 2] These changes included altering every aspect of the show from character names, clothing, scenes and dialogue of the show. The character Mr. Satan was renamed Hercule and this change has been retained in other English media such as Viz's Dragon Ball Z manga and video games, though the English dubs of Dragon Ball Kai and Dragon Ball Super changed the name back to Mr. Satan.[68] The dialogue changes would sometimes contradict the scenes itself; after the apparent fatal explosion of a helicopter, one of the characters said, "I can see their parachutes; they're okay!"[67] Funimation's redub for the 2005 release would address many of the issues raised by Saban, with the uncut releases preserving the integrity of the original Japanese release.

During the original Japanese TV airing of Dragon Ball Kai, scenes involving blood and brief nudity were removed. Nicktoons would also alter Kai for its broadcast; it released a preview showcasing these changes which included removing the blood and cheek scar from Bardock and altering the color of Master Roshi's alcohol.[69] The show was further edited for its broadcast on The CW; most notoriously, the character Mr. Popo was tinted blue. The show's DVD and Blu-ray releases only contained the edits present in the original Japanese version. A rumor that Cartoon Network would be airing Kai uncut was met with an official statement to debunk the rumor in June 2010.[70] However, it would later air uncut on the channel as part of Adult Swim's Toonami block.

Steven Simmons, who did the subtitling for Funimation's home video releases, offered commentary on the subtitling from a project and technical standpoint, addressing several concerns.[71][Note 3] Simmons said that Gen Fukunaga did not want any swearing on the discs, but because there was no taboo word list, Simmons would substitute a variation in the strength of the words by situation with the changes starting in episode 21.[72] The typographical errors in the script were caused by dashes (—) and double-quotes (") failing to appear, which resulted in confusing dialogue.[72]

Music
Main article: List of Dragon Ball soundtracks
Dragon Ball Z has released a series of 21 soundtracks as part of the Dragon Ball Z Hit Song Collection series. In total, dozens of releases exist for Dragon Ball Z which includes Japanese and foreign adapted releases of the anime themes and video game soundtracks.

Shunsuke Kikuchi composed the score for Dragon Ball Z. The opening theme for the first 199 episodes is "Cha-La Head-Cha-La" performed by Hironobu Kageyama. The second opening theme used up until the series finale at episode 291 is "We Gotta Power" also performed by Kageyama. Both opening themes were replaced with an original instrumental piece by Mark Menza, the composer of the alternate soundtrack, in the remastered Funimation dub due to licensing issues. The ending theme used for the first 199 episodes is "Detekoi Tobikiri Zenkai Power!" (でてこいとびきりZENKAIパワー!, "Come Out, Incredible Full Power!") performed by MANNA. The second ending theme used for the remaining episodes is "Bokutachi wa Tenshi Datta" (僕達は天使だった, "We Were Angels") performed by Kageyama. The initial English-Language release used a completely new musical score composed by Faulconer Productions. It was used for the North American broadcasts of the show from 1999 to 2005.[73]

Kenji Yamamoto composed the score for Dragon Ball Kai. The opening theme, "Dragon Soul", and the first ending theme used for the first 54 episodes, "Yeah! Break! Care! Break!", are both performed by Takayoshi Tanimoto of the unit, Dragon Soul, in Japanese. Sean Schemmel, Justin Cook, Vic Mignogna, Greg Ayres, Sonny Strait and Brina Palencia performed the English version of the opening theme, while Jerry Jewell performed the English version of the ending theme.[74] The second ending theme, used from episodes 55–98, is "Kokoro no Hane" (心の羽根, "Wings of the Heart") performed by Team Dragon, a unit of the idol girl group AKB48, in Japanese and Leah Clark in English.[75] On March 9, 2011, Toei announced that due to Yamamoto's score infringing on the rights of an unknown third party or parties, the music for remaining episodes and reruns of previous episodes would be replaced.[76] Later reports from Toei stated that except for the series' opening and closing songs, as well as eyecatch music, Yamamoto's score was replaced with Shunsuke Kikuchi's score from Dragon Ball Z.

The music for The Final Chapters is composed by Norihito Sumitomo.[77] The opening theme is "Kuu•Zen•Zetsu•Go" (空•前•絶•後) by Takayoshi Tanimoto of Dragon Soul, while the first ending song is "Haikei, Tsuratsusutora" (拝啓、ツラツストラ, "Dear Zarathustra") by Japanese rock band Good Morning America,[78] and the second "Junjō" (純情, "Pure Heart") by Leo Ieiri from episode 112 to 123.[79] The third ending song is "Oh Yeah!!!!!!!" by Czecho No Republic from episode 124 to 136,[80] the fourth "Galaxy" by Kyūso Nekokami from 137 to 146, and the fifth is "Don't Let Me Down" by Gacharic Spin from 147 to 159.[81] The international broadcast features two pieces of theme music. The opening theme, titled "Fight It Out", is performed by rock singer Masatoshi Ono, while the ending theme is "Never Give Up!!!", performed by rhythm and blues vocalist Junear.

Related media
Home media
In Japan, Dragon Ball Z did not receive a home video release until 2003, seven years after its broadcast. Pony Canyon announced a remastering of the series in two 26-disc DVD box sets, that were made-to-order only, released on March 19 and September 18 and referred to as "Dragon Box". Since then, Pony Canyon content of these sets began being released on mass-produced individual 6-episode DVDs on November 2, 2005, and finished with the 49th volume released on February 7, 2007.[82][83] In July 2009, Funimation announced that they would be releasing the Japanese frame-by-frame "Dragon Box" restoration of Dragon Ball Z in North America. These seven limited edition collector's DVD box sets were released uncut and unedited in the show's original 4:3 fullscreen format between November 10, 2009, and October 11, 2011.[84]

The international home release structure of Dragon Ball Z is complicated by the licensing and release of the companies involved in producing and distributing the work. Releases of the media occurred on both VHS and DVD with separate edited and uncut versions being released simultaneously. Both versions of the edited and uncut material are treated as different entries and would frequently make Billboard rankings as separate entries. Home release sales were featured prominently on the Nielsen VideoScan charts.[34] Further complicating the release of the material was Funimation itself; which was known to release "DVDs out of sequence in order to get them out as fast as possible"; as in the case of their third season.[85] Pioneer Entertainment distributed the Funimation/Saban edited-only dub of 53 episodes on seventeen VHS between 1997 and 1999,[86][87] and seventeen DVDs throughout 1999.[88][89] Two box sets separating them into the Saiyan and Namek arcs were also released on VHS in 1999,[90][91] and on DVD in 2001.[92][93] In 1999, Funimation's own distribution of their initial onward dub, which began with episode 54, in edited or uncut VHS ran between 1999 and 2006.[94][95][96] A DVD version was produced alongside these, although they were only produced uncut and contained the option to watch the original Japanese with subtitles.[97][98]

In 2005, Funimation began releasing their onward dub of the beginning of Dragon Ball Z on DVD, marking the first time the episodes were seen uncut in North America.[99] However, only nine volumes were released, leaving it incomplete.[100] Instead, Funimation remastered and cropped the entire series into 16:9 widescreen format and began re-releasing it to DVD in nine individual "season" box sets; the first set released on February 6, 2007, and the final on May 19, 2009.[101][102] On August 13, 2013, Funimation released all 53 episodes and the three movies from their first Dragon Ball Z dub created with Saban and Ocean Studios in a collector's DVD box set, titled the Rock the Dragon Edition.[103]

In July 2011, Funimation announced plans to release Dragon Ball Z in Blu-ray format, with the first set released on November 8, 2011.[104] However, production of these 4:3 sets was suspended after the second volume, citing financial and technical concerns over restoring the original film material frame by frame, with Funimation noting that the restoration costs incurred exceeded the retail price they were able to sell them for.[105] Only a year later, the company began producing a cropped 16:9 remastered Blu-ray release in 2013, with nine sets released in total.[106]

In March 2019, Funimation announced plans to release a 30th anniversary Blu-ray release of Dragon Ball Z, with the box set being remastered in 4:3 aspect ratio, and containing an artbook and a collectible figure.[107][108] It would be crowdfunded, originally requiring a minimum of 2500 pre-orders in order to be manufactured, but was later increased to a minimum of 3,000 units.[109] The release sparked controversy amongst fans due to the framing of the video, color saturation and digital video noise reduction.[110][111] Funimation responded by stating that they cropped the release by going in "scene-by-scene to make judgements based on the image available in each frame of how much to trim to get to a consistent 4:3 aspect ratio, while still attempting to cut as little out of the picture as possible," and that they felt the digital video noise reduction was "mandatory for this release based on the different levels of fan support from various past DBZ releases with different levels of noise reduction over the years."[112]

Kai
Main article: List of Dragon Ball Z Kai episodes § Home releases
In Japan, Dragon Ball Kai was released on wide-screen on 33 DVDs and fullscreen on a single Blu-ray and eight four-disc Blu-ray sets from September 18, 2009, to August 2, 2011.

Funimation released eight DVD and Blu-ray box sets of Dragon Ball Z Kai from May 18, 2010, to June 5, 2012.[113][114] These sets contain the original Japanese audio track with English subtitles, as well as the uncut version of the English dub, which does not contain any of the edits made for the TV airings. Before the final volume was even published, Funimation began re-releasing the series in four DVD and Blu-ray "season" sets between May 22, 2012, and March 12, 2013.[115][116] Funimation released The Final Chapters in three DVD and Blu-ray volumes from April 25 to June 20, 2017.[117][118][119]

Manga
Main articles: Dragon Ball (manga) and List of Dragon Ball Z chapters
While the manga was all titled Dragon Ball in Japan, due to the popularity of the Dragon Ball Z anime in the west, Viz Media initially changed the title of the last 26 volumes of the manga to "Dragon Ball Z" to avoid confusion. The volumes were originally published in Japan between 1988 and 1995. It began serialization in the American Shonen Jump, beginning in the middle of the series with the appearance of Trunks; the tankōbon volumes of both Dragon Ball Z and Dragon Ball were released simultaneously by Viz Media in the United States.[120][121] In March 2001, Viz continued this separation by re-shipping the Dragon Ball and Dragon Ball Z titles starting with the first volumes of each work.[122] Viz's marketing for the manga made distinct the differences between Dragon Ball and Dragon Ball Z tone. Viz billed Dragon Ball Z: "More action-packed than the stories of Goku's youth, Dragon Ball Z is pure adrenaline, with battles of truly Earth-shaking proportions!"[123] Between 2008 and 2010, Viz re-released the two series in a format called "Viz Big Edition," which collects three individual volumes into a single large volume.[124] Viz Media republished the series in fourteen 3-in-1 volumes, including what they previously released as Dragon Ball Z, under the Dragon Ball name, between June 4, 2013, and September 6, 2016.[125][126]

Films
Further information: List of Dragon Ball films
The Dragon Ball Z films comprise a total of 15 entries as of 2015. The first 13 films were typically released every March and July during the series' original run by the spring and summer vacations of Japanese schools. They were typically double features paired up with other anime films, and were thus, usually an hour or less in length. These films themselves offer contradictions in both chronology and design that make them incompatible with a single continuity. All 15 films were licensed in North America by Funimation, and all have received in-house dubs by the company. Before Funimation, the third film was a part of the short-lived Saban syndication, being split into three episodes, and the first three films received uncut English dubs in 1998 produced by Funimation with Ocean Studios and released by Pioneer. Several of the films have been broadcast on Cartoon Network and Nicktoons in the United States, Toonami UK in the United Kingdom (these featured an alternate English dub produced by an unknown cast by AB Groupe), and Cartoon Network in Australia.

Television specials and original video animations
Three TV specials based on Dragon Ball Z were produced and broadcast on Fuji TV. The first two were Dragon Ball Z: Bardock – The Father of Goku in 1990 and Dragon Ball Z: The History of Trunks in 1993, the latter being based on a special chapter of the original manga. Both were licensed by Funimation in North America and AB Groupe in Europe. In 2013, a two-part hour-long crossover with One Piece and Toriko, titled Dream 9 Toriko & One Piece & Dragon Ball Z Chō Collaboration Special!!, was created and aired.

Additionally, two original video animations (OVAs) bearing the Dragon Ball Z title have been made. The first is Dragon Ball Z Side Story: Plan to Eradicate the Saiyans, which was originally released in 1993 in two parts as "Official Visual Guides" for the video game of the same title. Dragon Ball: Plan to Eradicate the Super Saiyans was a 2010 remake of this OVA. None of the OVAs have been dubbed into English, and the only one to see a release in North America is the 2010 remake, which was subtitled and included as a bonus feature in Dragon Ball: Raging Blast 2.

Video games
Further information: List of Dragon Ball video games
Over 57 video games are bearing the Dragon Ball Z name across a range of platforms from the Nintendo Entertainment System to the current generation consoles, with the most recent release being Dragon Ball Z: Kakarot in 2020.

In North America, licensing rights had been given to both Namco Bandai and Atari. In 1999, Atari acquired exclusive rights to the video games through Funimation, a deal which was extended for five more years in 2005.[127] A 2007 dispute would end with Atari paying Funimation $3.5 million.[128] In July 2009, Namco Bandai was reported to have obtained exclusive rights to release the games for a period of five years.[129] This presumably would have taken effect after Atari's licensing rights expired at the end of January 2010.[128]

Reception
Dragon Ball Z was listed as the 78th best animated show in IGN's "Top 100 Animated Series",[130] and was also listed as the 50th greatest animated show in Wizard magazine's "Top 100 Greatest Animated shows" list.[131] The series ranked sixth on Wizard's Anime Magazine on their "Top 50 Anime released in North America".[132]

In Asia, the Dragon Ball Z franchise, including the anime and merchandise, earned a profit of $3 billion by 1999.[133] In the United States, the series sold over 14 million videos by 2002,[134] and over 25 million DVDs by January 2012.[135]

In 2005, media historian Hal Erickson wrote that "Dragon Ball may be the closest thing on American television to an animated soap opera — though this particular genre is an old, established and venerated one in Japan, the series' country of origin."[136] Christopher J. Olson and CarrieLynn D. Reinhard note that "Western fans flocked to Dragon Ball Z because it offered exciting action not found in movies or television shows (animated or otherwise) at that time."[137] A key characteristic that set Dragon Ball Z (and later other anime shows) apart from American television shows at the time was a serialization format, in which a continuous story arc stretches over multiple episodes or seasons. Traditional American television had an episodic format, with each episode typically consisting of a self-contained story. Serialization has since also become a common characteristic of American streaming television shows during the "Peak TV" era.[138]

Funimation's in-house English dub though has received mixed reviews from some critics over the years. IGN criticized the dub for "having poor quality, along with some over the top, and quite annoying voice acting." Frieza's female voice in particular left many fans confused over the character's gender.[139] Other criticisms have been towards the English dub's script, and inaccurately translating the source material, such as portraying Goku's character as a more stoic superhero.[140][141]

Cultural impact and legacy
Further information: Cultural impact of Dragon Ball
Dragon Ball Z's popularity is reflected through a variety of data through online interactions which show the popularity of the media. In 2001, it was reported that the official website of Dragon Ball Z recorded 4.7 million hits per day and included 500,000+ registered fans.[142] The term "Dragonball Z" ranked fourth in 1999 and second in 2000 by Lycos' web search engine.[143][144] For 2001, "Dragonball" was the most popular search on Lycos and "Dragonball Z" was fifth on Yahoo!.[145] and "Dragonball" was the third most popular search term in 2002.[146]

It's Over 9000! became a famous Internet meme and is referenced both within and outside Dragonball related media.

In 2015, Ford Motor Company released two commercials featuring characters from the series, the first advertising the Ford Fusion and the second for the Ford Focus.[147]

Dragon Ball fans set a Guinness World Record for Largest Kamehameha attack move at San Diego Comic-Con on July 17, 2019.[148]

Ratings
Dragon Ball Z's Japanese run was very popular with an average viewer rating of 20.5% across the series. Dragon Ball Z also proved to be a rating success in the United States, outperforming top shows such as Friends and The X-Files in some parts of the country in sweeps ratings during its first season.[149] The premiere of season three of Dragon Ball Z in 1999, done by Funimation's in-house dub, was the highest-rated program ever at the time on Cartoon Network.[150] In 2001, Cartoon Network obtained licensing to run 96 more episodes and air the original Dragon Ball anime and was the top rated show in the Toonami block of Cartoon Network.[151] Beginning March 26, 2001, Cartoon Network ran a 12-week special promotion "Toonami Reactor" which included a focus on Dragon Ball Z, which would stream episodes online to high-speed internet users.[152] Many home video releases were met with both the edited and unedited versions placing on in the top 10 video charts of Billboard. For example, "The Dark Prince Returns" (containing episodes 226-228) and "Rivals" (containing episodes 229-231) edited and unedited, made the Billboard magazine top video list for October 20, 2001.[153][Note 4] In 2002, in the week ending September 22, Dragon Ball Z was the #1 program of the week on all of television with tweens 9-14, boys 9-14 and men 12-24, with the Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday telecasts of Dragon Ball Z ranked as the top three programs in all of television, broadcast or cable, for delivery of boys 9-14.[154]

The first episode of Dragon Ball Kai earned a viewer ratings percentage of 11.3, ahead of One Piece and behind Crayon Shin-chan.[155] Although following episodes had lower ratings, Kai was among the top 10 anime in viewer ratings every week in Japan for most of its run.[156][157] Towards the end of the original run the ratings hovered around 9%-10%.[158][159] Dragon Ball Z Kai premiered on Nicktoons in May 2010 and set the record for the highest-rated premiere in total viewers, and in tweens and boys ages 9–14.[160] Nielsen Mega Manila viewer ratings ranked Dragon Ball Kai with a viewer ratings with a high of 18.4% for October 30 – November 4 in 2012.[161] At the end of April 2013, Dragon Ball Kai would trail just behind One Piece at 14.2%.[162] Broadcasters' Audience Research Board ranked Dragon Ball Z Kai as the second most viewed show in the week it debuted on Kix.[163] On its debut on Vortexx, Dragon Ball Z Kai was the third highest rated show on the Saturday morning block with 841,000 viewers and a 0.5 household rating.[164]

Merchandise
Dragon Ball Z merchandise was a success prior to its peak American interest, with more than $3 billion in sales from 1996 to 2000.[165] In 1996, Dragon Ball Z grossed $2.95 billion in merchandise sales worldwide.[166] By January 2012, Dragon Ball Z grossed $5 billion in merchandise sales worldwide.[135]

In 1998, Animage-ine Entertainment, a division of Simitar, announced the sale of Chroma-Cels, mock animation cels to capitalize on the popularity of Dragon Ball Z.[167] The original sale was forecasted for late 1998, but were pushed back to January 12, 1999.[168]


An acrylic replica of the Five-Star Dragon Ball.
In 2000, MGA Entertainment released more than twenty toys, consisting of table-top games and walkie-talkies.[169] Irwin Toy released more than 72 figures consisting of 2-inch and 5 inch action figures, which became top-selling toys in a market dominated by the Pokémon Trading Card Game.[170] Irwin Toys would release other unique Dragon Ball Z toys including a battery powered Flying Nimbus Cloud which hovered without touching the ground and a die-cast line of vehicles with collector capsules.[171] In June 2000, Burger King had a toy promotion which would see 20 million figures; Burger King bore the cost of the promotion which provided free marketing for Funimation.[165] The Halloween Association found Dragon Ball Z costumes to be the fourth most popular costumes in their nationwide survey.[172]

In December 2002, Jakks Pacific signed a three-year deal for licensing Dragon Ball Z toys, which was possible because of the bankruptcy of Irwin Toy.[173] Jakks Pacific's Dragon Ball Z 5-inch figures were cited as impressive for their painting and articulation.[174]

In 2010, Toei closed deals in Central and South American countries which included Algazarra, Richtex, Pil Andina, DTM, Doobalo and Bondy Fiesta.[175] In 2012, Brazil's Abr-Art Bag Rio Comercio Importacao e Exportacao closed a deal with Toei.[176]

Notes
Language notes

 Dragon Ball Z (ドラゴンボールZ, Doragon Bōru Zetto)
 Dragon Ball Kai (ドラゴンボール改カイ, Doragon Bōru Kai, lit. Dragon Ball Revised), retitled Dragon Ball Z Kai in most international releases
General notes

 In North America through Crunchyroll (formerly known as Funimation), in the United Kingdom through Crunchyroll UK and Ireland (formerly known as Manga Entertainment) and in Australia through Madman Anime
 The original interview was conducted by Steve Harmon with Funimation CEO Gen Fukunaga in 1999 and was hosted on Harmon's website "The Vault". A record of the website exists on Archive.org, but the original interview itself was lost. The record was kept by Chris Psaros who provided a copy for the website "The Dragon Ball Z Otaku Alliance" which republished the original interview for this source.
 Steven Simmons, who uses the nickname "Daimao" in websites like Toriyama.org, wrote the original scripts for the Funimation subtitles and was involved in the localization process. His comments are included as a primary source, but also definitively illustrate concerns with the subtitles, from its creator. This connection and background is noted in the accompanying Anime News Network reference.
 The releases for both The Dark Prince Returns and Babidi: Showdown were released on September 25, 2001. The title "Showdown" was replaced with "Rivals" and contains episodes 229–231, titled "Vegeta's Pride", "The Long-Awaited Flight", and "Magic Ball of Buu". Before the release, Billboard and news outlets including the Anime News Network and Anime Nation were using the title "Showdown"; but the Universal Product Codes match, indicating a re-titling for this release, "Rivals", also has a September 25, 2001, release date for the uncut material.
References
 "Dragon Ball Z". Funimation. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 13, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Z, Vol. 1". Viz Media. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019.
 "YTV Fall Lineup". Anime News Network. June 22, 2000. Retrieved July 13, 2024.
 "Dragon Ball Z". Cartoon Network. Archived from the original on March 21, 2002. Retrieved June 5, 2023.
 Hazra, Adriana (April 21, 2023). "Cartoon Network Airs Dragon Ball Z Kai Anime in India on Sundays, Dragon Ball Z: Cooler's Revenge Film on April 23". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023.
 "Dragon Ball". Toei Animation USA. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2017.
 "深夜アニメの製作資金は約3億円…儲ける仕組みや製作委員会の構造とは 今こそ知っておきたいアニメビジネスの特徴を取材". Social Game Info (in Japanese). June 17, 2016. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2019.
 Barder, Ollie (October 15, 2016). "Kazuhiko Torishima on Shaping the Success of 'Dragon Ball' and the Origins of 'Dragon Quest'". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2016.
 "Shonen Jump". Shonen Jump: 92–97. October 3, 2003.
 Clements, Jonathan; Helen McCarthy (September 1, 2001). The Anime Encyclopedia: A Guide to Japanese Animation Since 1917 (1st ed.). Berkeley, California: Stone Bridge Press. pp. 101–102. ISBN 1-880656-64-7. OCLC 47255331.
 Editors' roundtable, Jump Comics (Shueisha), July 2, 2004, page 88. ISBN 4088737059
 DRAGON BALL 大全集 3: TV ANIMATION PART 1 (in Japanese). Shueisha. 1995. pp. 202–207. ISBN 4-08-782753-4.
 Dragon Ball Supplemental Daizenshuu: TV Animation Part 3, pages 107–113
 DRAGON BALL 超全集 4 超事典. Shueisha. 2013. pp. 340–345. ISBN 978-4-08-782499-5.
 "Dragon Ball Back Then Vol. 2: Interview with "Dragon Ball Z" character designer Tadayoshi Yamamuro". Dragon Ball Anime Illustration: Kin'iro no Senshi (ドラゴンボール アニメイラスト集 「黄金の戦士」) [Dragon Ball Anime Illustration Collection: The Golden Warrior] (in Japanese). Tōkyō: Hōmusha. April 21, 2010. pp. 50–1. ISBN 978-4834284133.
 Cronin, Brian (January 2, 2018). "Comic Legends: Why Did Goku's Hair Turn Blonde?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 19, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2019.
 "Protoculture Addicts (November/December 1995): Spotlight - Dragon Ball Overview". Kanzenshuu.com. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020.
 "Protoculture Addicts (November/December 1995): Spotlight - Dragon Ball Synopses". Kanzenshuu.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020.
 "The Dragon Ball Z American Debut Date". Kanzenshuu.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 16, 2021.
 Erickson, Hal (2005). Television Cartoon Shows: An Illustrated Encyclopedia, 1949 Through 2003. McFarland & Company. pp. 283–285.
 Dragon Ball Z end credits (FUNimation/Saban dub, 1996)
 Dragon Ball end credits (FUNimation/BLT dub, 1995)
 Cavanaugh, Patrick (November 25, 2014). "Marvel 75: Ron Wasserman Composed Your '90s Childhood". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved February 8, 2016.
 David Robb (September 18–20, 1998). "Composers say they're paupers in royalty game". Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 28, 2024. Retrieved March 8, 2024 – via groups.google.com.
 Dragon Ball Z at BMI
 "Pioneer Announces Last Dragonball Z Release". Anime News Network. November 14, 1998. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 Dragon Ball Z Funimation/Saban dub, episodes 1-53 (1-67 uncut)
 Dornemann, Emlyn (March 18, 2019). "Anime Censorship in the 90s and Early 2000s | Comic Book Legal Defense Fund". Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2019.
 "Protoculture Addicts (February/March 1997): Feature - Dragon Ball Z Sidebar". Kanzenshuu.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020.
 "Saban Kids Library Headed for Fox". Multichannel News. Future US. January 4, 1998. Archived from the original on March 16, 2024. Retrieved March 16, 2024.
 Cynthia Littleton (December 31, 1997). "Saban trims syndie arm". Variety. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016.
 Chris Sabat Interview - Z vs. Kai Dub and the History of Funimation. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.
 "Dragon Ball Z to Air in Kids WB". DBZN.net. July 18, 2001. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2013.
 De La Cruz, Edwin (November 23, 2003). "'Dragon Ball Z' keeps up the momentum". Video Store. Questex Media Group, Inc. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 "Previously Unreleased Dragon Ball Z DVDs!". ICv2. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 "Funimation 2005 Plans". Anime News Network. December 31, 2004. Archived from the original on October 7, 2008. Retrieved September 14, 2008.
 MacDonald, Christopher (June 9, 2005). "DBZ Uncut on Cartoon Network". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved September 14, 2008.
 "Funimation to Stream Dragon Ball Z in North America". Anime News Network. January 3, 2011. Archived from the original on January 6, 2011. Retrieved January 3, 2011.
 Dragon Ball Z end credits (Westwood Media dub, c. 2001)
 Howe, Rupert (March 5, 2000). "Made in Japan: Chasing the Dragon; Pokémon Was Nicknamed 'Kiddie Crack' but a New Wave of Japanese Monsters Threatens to Be Even More Addictive". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013.
 Luster, Joseph (March 15, 2022). "Dragon Ball, Dragon Ball Z and Dragon Ball GT Are Now on Crunchyroll!". Crunchyroll. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved May 27, 2022.
 Dragon Ball Z Kai, April 5, 2009, archived from the original on September 28, 2023, retrieved October 19, 2018
 "Japan's Remastered DBZ to Be Called Dragon Ball Kai". Anime News Network. February 19, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball Z to Rerun on Japanese TV in HD in April". Anime News Network. February 6, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2009.
 "｢ドラゴンボールZ｣放送開始20周年記念! HDリマスター坂で テレビアニメが堂々復活!! 孫悟空伝説再び!! その名も... DRAGON BALL KAI". V Jump (in Japanese). Japan: Shueisha: 10. February 9, 2009.
 Interview de l'éditeur de Dragon Ball — L'influence de Dragon Ball — Partie 6 (web video). Kazé. January 17, 2015. Event occurs at 6:27. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 ドラゴンボール改 人造人間・セル編 15 [Dragon Ball Kai Artificial Human/Cell Volume 15 (DVD)] (in Japanese). Happinet Pictures. Archived from the original on April 27, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2011.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai's Japanese Cast Records New Episodes". Anime News Network. November 6, 2012. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
 "New Dragon Ball Z Kai Anime Series to Premiere on April 6". Anime News Network. February 17, 2014. Archived from the original on February 17, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014.
 Dragon Ball Z Kai: The Final Chapters Listed at 69 Episodes Archived March 24, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Anime News Network (April 17, 2014). Retrieved on May 12, 2014.
 Loo, Egan (February 2, 2010). "Navarre Reveals Funimation's Dragon Ball Kai License". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved February 2, 2010.
 Heldenfelds, Rich (March 11, 2010). "Nickelodeon Announces Fall Plans". Ohio.com. Akron Beach Journal. Archived from the original on May 17, 2007. Retrieved September 5, 2012.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai to Air on TheCW4Kids on Saturdays". Anime News Network. April 26, 2010. Archived from the original on April 28, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2010.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai to Run on Adult Swim's Toonami Block". Anime News Network. May 24, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai Gets an Extra Slot on Adult Swim". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved February 20, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai now broadcast in the UK | TOEI Animation Europe". Toei-animation.com. November 19, 2012. Archived from the original on November 23, 2012. Retrieved November 23, 2012.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai Due on U.K. Television This Month". Anime News Network. November 20, 2012. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved November 23, 2012.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai TV Screenings on Kix! Channel in Early 2013". Anime News Network. December 11, 2012. Archived from the original on June 14, 2013. Retrieved April 22, 2013.
 "Kyle Herbert, Sean Schemmel Returning in Dragon Ball Z Kai Buu Saga Dub". Anime News Network. April 24, 2013. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved November 11, 2013.
 "Australia's Madman Ent: DBZ Kai's Buu Saga Should Come in 2014". Anime News Network. November 23, 2013. Archived from the original on January 30, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014.
 "Funimation Has Not Recorded a Dub for Dragon Ball Z Kai's Buu Saga". Anime News Network. February 17, 2014. Archived from the original on May 19, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 Funimation (December 6, 2016). "Dragon Ball Z Kai: The Final Chapters heading to Toonami!". www.funimation.com. Funimation. Archived from the original on December 9, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016.
 Brian Drummond Interview: History of the Ocean Dub, ORIGINAL Vegeta, Over 9000, 90s Dubbing + MORE!. Archived from the original on March 11, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.
 Voice Actor Panel at Holiday Matsuri Part 1 - YouTube. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.
 Scott McNeil confirms no Buu arc so far in Ocean Kai - YouTube. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020 – via YouTube.
 "List of Canadian programs certified by the Commission". CRTC.gc.ca. January 17, 2019. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020.
 "Reprinted Interview: 30-Something Questions with Gen Fukunaga". DBZOA.net. Archived from the original on August 19, 2003. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 Dragon Ball Z: Ultimate, Battle 22, TOSE Software Co., 1995
 Paschal, Jacob T. (May 21, 2010). "What Is Dragon Ball Kai? Part II: How to Watch Kai in America". ToonZone.net. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2013.
 Saabedra, Humberto (June 21, 2010). "Cartoon Network Debunks Dragon Ball Z Kai Uncensored Airing Rumor". AnimeNews.biz. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2013.
 "DBZ Subtitling Article". Anime News Network. July 28, 2000. Archived from the original on June 10, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "Concerning the DVDs". Toriyama.org. July 26, 2000. Archived from the original on October 21, 2000. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 "Bruce Faulconer". IMDb. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2019.
 オープニング&エンディングテーマが決定! (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Archived from the original on April 9, 2009. Retrieved April 15, 2006.
 "チームドラゴン fromAKB48 : チームドラゴン from AKB48、『ドラゴンボール改』ED曲を全11種類のパッケージで発売 / BARKS ニュース". Barks (in Japanese). June 1, 2007. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved May 31, 2007.
 Loo, Egan (March 10, 2011). "Toei Replaces Possibly Infringing Dragon Ball Kai Music". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on March 13, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2011.
 "Shino Kakinuma Replaces Yuko Minaguchi as Videl in Dragon Ball Z Kai". Anime News Network. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved March 10, 2014.
 "Rock Band Good Morning America Performs New Dragon Ball Kai Ending". Anime News Network. March 3, 2014. Archived from the original on June 12, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 "Leo Ieiri Performs 2nd Dragon Ball Z Kai Anime's Ending Theme". Anime News Network. June 18, 2014. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 ""Dragon Ball Kai" New ED Song PV by Czecho No Republic". Crunchyroll. November 1, 2014. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 "Girl Band Gacharic Spin to Perform New Dragon Ball Z Kai Ending". Anime News Network. March 10, 2015. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015.
 DRAGON BALL Z 第1巻 [DVD], ASIN B000B66IZ4
 DRAGON BALL Z ♯49 [DVD], ASIN B000VVQLHE
 "Funimation Entertainment Announces First U.S. Release of Dragon Box" (Press release). Funimation. July 20, 2009. Archived from the original on September 15, 2009. Retrieved August 28, 2009.
 "Dragon Ball Z news". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 1: Arrival [VHS]. ASIN 630455818X.
 Dragon Ball Z — Super Saiyan (Vol. 17)(Episodes 50-53) [VHS], November 17, 1998, ASIN B00000FDRS
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 1 – Arrival (1999), ASIN B00000IC71
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 17 – Super Saiyan (1999), ASIN B00002IJ0T
 Dragon Ball Z — The Saiyan Conflict (Boxed Set I — Episodes 1-25) [VHS], ASIN B00000ICEY
 Dragon Ball Z — The Namek Saga (Boxed Set II — Episodes 26-53) [VHS], ASIN B00000IKZK
 Dragon Ball Z — The Saiyan Conflict (Boxed Set I — Episodes 1-25), ASIN B00005NX1J
 Dragon Ball Z — The Namek Saga (Boxed Set II — Episodes 26-53), ASIN B00005NX1K
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 18 – Captain Ginyu: Assault [VHS]. ASIN 6305452725.
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 18 – Captain Ginyu: Assault (Uncut) [VHS]. ASIN 6305452733.
 Dragon Ball Z: Kid Buu — New Beginning [VHS], ASIN B00008976M
 Dragonball Z, Vol. 18 – Captain Ginyu: Assault, ASIN B00004U3V1
 Dragon Ball Z — Kid Buu — A New Beginning, ASIN B00008976N
 DragonBall Z: Vegeta Saga 1 – Saiyan Showdown ( Vol. 1 ), ASIN B0007LXOGY
 DragonBall Z: Vegeta Saga 2 – Saiyan Invasion ( Vol. 1 ), ASIN B000CNGBUI
 Dragon Ball Z: Season One (Vegeta Saga), ASIN B000KWZ1TI
 Dragon Ball Z: Season Nine (Majin Buu Saga), ASIN B001US3XQY
 Dragon Ball Z: Rock the Dragon Collector's Edition (2013), ASIN B00D7TS972
 "Funimation Entertainment Announces Dragon Ball Z Series on Blu-Ray". Funimation.com (Press release). Funimation. July 21, 2011. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016.
 Hodgkins, Crystalyn (January 26, 2012). "FUNimation Suspends Production of Dragon Ball Z Blu-rays" (Press release). Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 30, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2023.
 Dragon Ball Z: Season 9 [Blu-ray], ASIN B00NP06FAQ
 Hodgkins, Crystalyn (March 3, 2019). "Funimation Reveals Plans for New Dragon Ball Z BD Collector's Edition if it Receives 2,500 Pre-Orders". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Funimation [@FUNimation] (April 5, 2019). "The Dragon Ball Z 30th Anniversary collector's edition is now available to preorder! See EVERYTHING this amazing set has to offer: https://funi.to/DBZ30th Oh, and yes... it's in 4:3. 🔥🔥🔥 #DBZ30th" (Tweet). Retrieved April 14, 2019 – via Twitter.
 Peters, Megan (March 18, 2019). "'Dragon Ball Z' 30th Anniversary Collection Ups Pre-Order Minimum". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Sevakis, Justin (April 17, 2019). "Why Do Funimation's Dragon Ball Z Re-Releases Look Like That? - Answerman". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2019.
 Valdez, Nick (April 8, 2019). "'Dragon Ball Z' Fans Are Worried About the 30th Anniversary Collector's Edition Set". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 "How the Dragon Ball Z 30th Anniversary Collector's Edition 4:3 aspect ratio was created". Funimation. April 9, 2019. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2019.
 Dragon Ball Z Kai: Part One Blu-ray, ASIN B0036ZA8G2
 Dragon Ball Z Kai: Part Eight [Blu-ray], ASIN B007NU53C0
 Dragon Ball Z Kai: Season 1 [Blu-ray], ASIN B0079KGANU
 Dragon Ball Z Kai: Season 4 [Blu-ray], ASIN B00AUJH3GU
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai – The Final Chapter – Part One – Blu-ray – Home-Video". Funimation Shop. Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
 "The Final Chapter – Part Two – Blu-ray|home-video". Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
 "The Final Chapter – Part Three – Blu-ray|home-video". Archived from the original on April 20, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2018.
 "Viz announces 4/99 releases". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "Viz announces products for 7/99 release". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 30, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "March Manga releases". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "Releases from Viz posted on November 2, 2000". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 12, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013.
 "Dragon Ball Z, Vol. 1 (VIZBIG Edition)". Barnes & Noble Booksellers, Inc. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball (3-in-1 Edition), Vol. 1". Viz Media. Retrieved December 23, 2024.
 "Dragon Ball (3-in-1 Edition), Vol. 14". Viz Media. Retrieved December 23, 2024.
 "Atari and FUNimation Extend Dragon Ball License". Wireless News. Close-Up Media, Inc. January 11, 2005. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 "Atari Settles 'Dragonball Z' (ALL) Dispute With FUNimation". Worthplaying. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2013.
 McWhertor, Michael (July 2, 2009). "Namco Bandai Locks Down Dragon Ball License for America". Kotaku. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 "78. Dragon Ball Z". IGN. January 23, 2009. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved September 25, 2016.
 "Wizard Magazine's Top 100 cartoons list". Listal. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved April 30, 2011.
 "Wizard lists Top 50 Anime". Anime News Network. July 6, 2001. Archived from the original on July 5, 2007. Retrieved February 2, 2014.
 Erickson, Hal (2005). Television cartoon shows: an illustrated encyclopedia, 1949 through 2003. McFarland & Company. p. 284. ISBN 978-0-7864-2255-5. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Introduced in Japan as Doragon boru Z in 1989, the property was successful enough in anime form, but the attendant merchandising of toys, action figures and video games went through the roof; within ten years, profits in Asia alone totaled $3 billion.
 "Infogrames Expands $3 Billion Franchise, Ships New Dragon Ball Z Title on PlayStation(R)2 December 4". PR Newswire. November 12, 2002. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2022 – via Gale.
 "Funimation January 2012 Catalog" (PDF). thecnl.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved July 30, 2017.
 Erickson, Hal (2005). Television cartoon shows: an illustrated encyclopedia, 1949 through 2003. McFarland & Company. p. 284. ISBN 978-0-7864-2255-5.
 Olson, Christopher J.; Reinhard, CarrieLynn D. (May 29, 2020). The Greatest Cult Television Shows of All Time. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 62. ISBN 978-1-5381-2256-3. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved September 19, 2020.
 Ziegler, John R.; Richards, Leah (January 9, 2020). Representation in Steven Universe. Springer Nature. p. 10. ISBN 978-3-030-31881-9. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved September 28, 2023.
 Isler, Ramsey (June 15, 2012). "What's Wrong With Dragon Ball Z Part One". IGN. Archived from the original on May 14, 2023. Retrieved May 17, 2023.
 Greenough, Caleb (April 4, 2023). "Dragon Ball Z: 10 Worst English Dub Quotes". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on May 17, 2023. Retrieved May 17, 2023.
 Fontes, Renan (June 26, 2019). "Dragon Ball: The 10 Biggest Changes Funimation Made To The Franchise In North America". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 17, 2023. Retrieved May 17, 2023.
 Azoulay, Julia F (June 1, 2001). "Character study: CB offers a licensing show cheat sheet". Children's Business. Conde Nast Publications, Inc. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 Evers, Joris (December 20, 2000). "Britney Spears tops Lycos 2000 search terms list". Network World. Network World Inc./IDG. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 Phan, Monty (January 14, 2001). "Ugh, they did it again -- and again". Post-Tribune (IN). Sun-Times News Group. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 Schorow, Stephanie (January 8, 2002). "Predictably, Nostradamus tops searches on Internet". The Boston Herald. Herald Media, LLC. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 "Britney loses out to PlayStation". BBC News. December 30, 2002. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2022.
 Makuch, Eddie (December 30, 2015). "Watch These Bizarre Ford Car Commercials Featuring Dragon Ball Z". GameSpot. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2016.
 Loveridge, Lynzee (July 18, 2019). "Fans Annihilate Kamehameha World Record at San Diego Comic-Con". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023.
 "Behind the Screens". Electronic Gaming Monthly. No. 98. Ziff Davis. September 1997. p. 118.
 "Gundam Wing Leaving Toonami?!". Anime News Network. December 12, 2000. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Retrieved November 29, 2008.
 Reynolds, Mike (February 26, 2001). "Cartoon Upfront With New Show Spending". Cable World. Access Intelligence, LLC. Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 Stump, Matt (April 23, 2001). "Broadband 'Toonami' Boosts Cable Modems". Multichannel News. NewBay Media LLC. Archived from the original on October 11, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 The Associated Press. (October 12, 2001). "Most Popular Videos". AP Online. Press Association, Inc. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 "Dragonball Z Tops Ratings". Anime News Network. September 22, 2002. Archived from the original on April 7, 2014. Retrieved May 26, 2014.
 "Japanese Anime TV Ranking, March 30-April 5". Anime News Network. April 13, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2009.
 "Japanese Anime TV Ranking, April 6–12". Anime News Network. April 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2009.
 "Japanese Anime TV Ranking, April 13–19". Anime News Network. April 22, 2009. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved April 29, 2009.
 "海外で話題の日本アニメをソーシャルメディアから探る！ ～「ワンピース」が各国のつぶやきで上位に～". Videor.co.jp. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 "バックナンバー2011年度 VOL.6 2011年 1月31日(月) ～ 2月6日(日)". Videor. Archived from the original on February 18, 2011. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 "Nickelodeon Ranks As Basic Cable's Top Network with Kids, Total Viewers; Scores Most-Watched May Ever with Total Viewers" (Press release). New York City: Viacom. June 2010. Archived from the original on June 6, 2010. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 Tuazon, Nikko (April 30, 2013). "AGB Nielsen Mega Manila Household Ratings (Oct. 30-Nov. 4): Be Careful with My Heart Rules Daytime; 24 Oras and Ina Kapatid Anak Share Primetime Lead". Pep. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 Tuazon, Nikko (April 30, 2013). "AGB Nielsen Mega Manila Household Ratings (April 26 to 28): Aljur Abrenica's Magpakailanman episode tops Saturday ratings". PEP. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2013.
 "Viewing data Top 10s". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Archived from the original on July 18, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2014.
 Kondolojy, Kondolojy (August 30, 2012). "Saturday Morning Vortexx Ratings Notes for the CW: 'WWE Saturday Morning Slam', 'Dragon Ball Z Kai', 'Justice League Unlimited' & More". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on September 1, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2014.
 "Burger King Uses Kids' Meals to Promote Japanese Cartoon Series" (Press release). North Richland Hills, Texas: Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News. June 5, 2000. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013.
 "Manga, Anime Rooted in Japanese History". The Indianapolis Star. August 2, 1997. p. 44. Archived from the original on May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018.
 "Ani-Mag Announces Chroma-Cels of Sailor Moon, DBZ". Anime News Network. November 30, 1998. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "News Briefs". Anime News Network. December 12, 1998. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "MGA Signs for Dragonball Z". Playthings. January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013 – via HighBeam Research.
 Cuthbert, Joyce (February 1, 2000). "Chicago". Playthings. Furniture Today Media Group LLC. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013 – via HighBeam Research.
 "Irwin Toy Launches". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 21, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013.
 "The Hype All Dressed Up with Somewhere to Go". Los Angeles Daily News. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. October 25, 2000. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2013 – via HighBeam Research.
 Hopkins, Brent (February 19, 2003). "Toy Maker Bets on Dead Delinquent Jakks Pacific Shifts Its Focus from Wrestling". Los Angeles Daily News. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013 – via Archived.
 Szadkowski, Joseph (December 3, 2005). "Bump on Head Does Good for Warrior, Target Earth". The Washington Times. Washington, D.C. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013.
 Loveday, Samantha (May 7, 2010). "Toei Seals Latin America Deals". Licensing.biz. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
 Dickson, Jeremy (January 9, 2012). "Toei Lands Licensing Deal for Dragon Ball Z". Kidscreen. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2013.
Further reading
Mínguez-López, Xavier (March 2014). "Folktales and Other References in Toriyama's Dragon Ball Z". Animation. 9 (1): 27–46. doi:10.1177/1746847713519386. hdl:10550/44043. ISSN 1746-8477. S2CID 35435730.
External links
Official website (in English)
Official website (in Japanese)
Dragon Ball Z (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
vte
Dragon Ball by Akira Toriyama
vte
Toei Animation television series
vte
Kids' WB
Portals:
icon Anime and manga
flag Japan
icon 1980s
icon 1990s
Dragon Ball Z at Wikipedia's sister projects:

Media from Commons

Quotations from Wikiquote
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: 1989 anime television series debutsAnime seriesDragon Ball anime1996 Japanese television series endingsAnimated television series set on fictional planetsAnime and manga about time travelAnime series based on mangaComedy anime and mangaCrunchyroll animeFiction about body swappingFiction about reincarnationFiction about size changeFirst-run syndicated television programs in the United StatesFuji Television original programmingFunimationGeneon USAGenies in anime and mangaJapanese mythology in anime and mangaJapanese time travel television seriesSequel television seriesShueisha franchisesShunsuke KikuchiTelevision censorship in the United StatesTelevision series by Saban EntertainmentTime loop anime and mangaToei Animation television
This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 17:16 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Dragon Ball Z

65 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot

Production

Music
Media

Merchandise
Reception

Notes
References
External links
Dragon Ball Super

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Not to be confused with Super Dragon Ball Z or Super Dragon Ball Heroes (web series).
Dragon Ball Super

First tankōbon volume cover, featuring Son Goku above Shenlong
ドラゴンボール超スーパー
(Doragon Bōru Sūpā)
Genre	
Adventure[1]
Fantasy comedy[1][2]
Martial arts[1]
Created by	Akira Toriyama
Manga
Written by	Akira Toriyama
Illustrated by	Toyotarou
Published by	Shueisha
English publisher	
NA: Viz Media
Imprint	Jump Comics
Magazine	V Jump
Demographic	Shōnen
Original run	June 20, 2015 – present
Volumes	24 (List of volumes)
Anime television series
Directed by	
Masatoshi Chioka
Morio Hatano
Kōhei Hatano
Tatsuya Nagamine
Ryōta Nakamura
Produced by	
Atsushi Kido
Osamu Nozaki
Naoko Sagawa
Tomosuke Teramoto
Satoru Takami
Shunki Hashizume
Hiroyuki Sakurada
Written by	Akira Toriyama
Music by	Norihito Sumitomo
Studio	Toei Animation
Licensed by	
Crunchyroll[a]
SEA: Bang Zoom! Entertainment
Original network	Fuji TV
English network	
AU: ABC Me
IN: Cartoon Network
MY: TA-DAA!
SEA: Toonami
UK: Pop, CBBC[3]
US: Adult Swim (Toonami)
ZA: Cartoon Network, SABC 2
Original run	July 5, 2015 – March 25, 2018
Episodes	131 (List of episodes)
Anime films
Dragon Ball Super: Broly (2018)
Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero (2022)
Media franchise
List of all Dragon Ball series
List of all Dragon Ball films
List of all Dragon Ball video games
List of all Dragon Ball soundtracks
icon Anime and manga portal
Dragon Ball Super (Japanese: ドラゴンボール超スーパー, Hepburn: Doragon Bōru Sūpā) is a Japanese manga series written by Akira Toriyama and illustrated by Toyotarou. Set during the time frame of Toriyama's original Dragon Ball manga, it follows the adventures of Son Goku and his friends during the ten-year timeskip between the defeat of Majin Buu and the conclusion of Dragon Ball Z.[4][5] It began serialization in Shueisha's monthly shōnen manga magazine V Jump in June 2015. The manga is simulpublished in English by Viz Media and by Shueisha on their Manga Plus platform.

An anime television series produced by Toei Animation aired in Japan from July 2015 to March 2018, making it the latest mainline Dragon Ball series since Dragon Ball GT in 1996 (excluding the 2024–2025 miniseries Dragon Ball Daima).[6] The first two arcs of the anime readapted the events of the Dragon Ball Z films Battle of Gods (2013) and Resurrection 'F' (2015), the latter which was only summarized in the manga. A sequel film, Dragon Ball Super: Broly, was released in December 2018 and became the highest-grossing anime film of the franchise; like Resurrection 'F', it was included in the manga as a quick summarization. A second film, Super Hero, was released on June 11, 2022, and was later adapted into the manga. The anime series concluded at the end of the Universe Survival saga, while the manga went into hiatus with the conclusion of the Super Hero saga following Toriyama's death in March 2024. A one-shot chapter, which had been written by Toriyama and serves as a prequel to Super Hero, was released in February 2025 and included in volume 24, released in April 2025.[7]

Plot
Main articles: List of Dragon Ball Super chapters and List of Dragon Ball Super episodes
As of 2025, the anime has concluded with the Universe Survival Saga, while the manga continued with new story arcs.

Battle of Gods Saga
In a retelling of the film Dragon Ball Z: Battle of Gods (2013), Son Goku works as a farmer and his family and friends live peacefully following the defeat of Majin Buu. However, the God of Destruction, Beerus, awakens after a dream about a Saiyan God. Beerus, along with his Angel assistant and teacher, Whis, seeks a warrior known as the Super Saiyan God, threatening to destroy the Earth if the warrior loses to him.[8] Goku uses the dragon Balls and discovers that it takes six pure hearted saiyans to become the Super Saiyan God which resulted in Goku becoming the Super Saiyan god, with the help of his friends, battles Beerus and loses, but his efforts appease Beerus, who spares the planet and Befriends Goku, allowing Goku to train in his place

Resurrection of Frieza Saga
In a retelling of the film Dragon Ball Z: Resurrection 'F' (2015),[b] Goku and Vegeta train with Whis, while the remnants of the Frieza Force collect the Earth's Dragon Balls and resurrect Frieza. After training for four months, Frieza returns to Earth, seeking revenge of Goku. Despite achieving his Golden transformation, he is defeated by Goku and Vegeta, who have mastered the Super Saiyan Blue transformation (otherwise known as Super Saiyan god Super Saiyan), a transformation achieved by using and controlling God Ki. In spite, Frieza destroys the Earth, but Whis reverses time, allowing Goku to slay Frieza.

Universe 6 Saga
Following Frieza's defeat, Beerus's twin brother, Champa, the God of Destruction of Universe 6, and his assistant and Whis's sister, Vados, visit Beerus while Goku and Vegeta are in the middle of training and host a tournament against Universe 7, the one where Goku and his friends reside. Universe 7 wins the tournament and gets to use the Super Dragon Balls, which can used to do anything that the user may desire. Beerus desires to restore Universe 6's Earth for Champa. The tournament draws the attention of Zeno, who is the ruler of all twelve universes, he wishes to watch another tournament involving the rest of the universes in the future, and also Befriends Goku because of his handshake.

Future Trunks Saga
Future Trunks returns with news of a dark enemy with a terrifying aura who resembles Goku, known as Goku Black who has killed almost everyone in Future Trunks' timeline. They discover that Goku Black's true identity is Zamasu, a Kaioshin apprentice from Universe 10 of Future Trunks' timeline. Zamasu had used the Super Dragon Balls to steal Goku's body from a different timeline, as part of his plan to wipe out every mortal.[9] Ultimately, Fused Zamasu (the union between Black and Zamasu) and the future timeline are erased from existence by Future Zeno, who accompanies Goku back to the present, where he becomes Present Zeno's friend. Future Trunks and Future Mai leave for an alternate timeline.

Universe Survival Saga
Both Zenos hold the Tournament of Power, where teams of ten fighters from eight of the twelve universes will battle, with defeated universes being erased from existence.[10] Goku, Vegeta, Gohan, Piccolo, Krillin, Android 18, Tien Shinhan, and Master Roshi are joined by Android 17 and a temporarily revived Frieza. They battle formidable warriors, such as Universe 11's Jiren. Goku attains a new technique known as Ultra Instinct -sign- and Mastered Ultra Instinct, allowing him to fight unconsciously and with very precise moves.[11] The tournament ends with Goku and Frieza eliminating Jiren along with themselves, leaving Android 17 as the winner for Universe 7. He is awarded one wish from the Super Dragon Balls, and restores the erased universes. As a reward for helping in the tournament, Frieza is permanently revived by Whis.

Galactic Patrol Prisoner Saga
Following the events of the film Dragon Ball Super: Broly (2018),[c] Goku and Vegeta are asked by the Galactic Patrol to recapture a fugitive named Moro, an evil magician who can siphon and manipulate ki from any source, including planets. Goku and Vegeta are unsuccessful and are rescued. On New Namek, Moro defeats them and uses the Namekians' Dragon Balls to restore his full power and release all criminals in the Galactic Patrol's custody. Moro and the convicts rampage across the galaxy while Goku and Vegeta train for a rematch, which Moro anticipates. Training with Merus, a galactic patrol agent who is an Angel apprentice, Goku learns to use Ultra Instinct and Mastered Ultra Instinct at will, while Vegeta heads to Planet Yardrat to train. Moro and his army head to Earth, and Goku's allies make a stand until Goku and Vegeta arrive. Nearing defeat, Moro fuses with the Earth, threatening to self-destruct and destroy the galaxy. After absorbing energy fused by Vegeta's new powers, Goku slays Moro, saving Earth.

Granolah the Survivor Saga
Granolah, a Cerelian mercenary, learns from the Heeters that Frieza is alive and vows to avenge his destroyed home planet, Cereal. Using his planet's Dragon Balls, Granolah becomes the strongest warrior in the universe but sacrifices his lifespan. The Heeters manipulate Goku and Vegeta into fighting him. During their battle, Vegeta gains a new transformation, Ultra Ego, but Granolah defeats them. Granolah's foster father, Monaito, reveals that Goku’s father, Bardock, saved them from Frieza’s attack on Cereal years ago, and that the Heeters were responsible for the destruction of Granolah’s planet and the death of his mother.

The Heeters—Oil, Maki, and Gas—arrive to finish off Granolah and the others. Gas easily defeats Granolah and Goku, but Vegeta gives Granolah a Senzu bean, allowing him to overpower Gas. Gas goes berserk after his power suppression pendant is removed but regains control with Elec's help. Goku distracts Gas, allowing the group to retreat and recuperate at Monaito’s house. Monaito gives Goku Bardock’s scouter, revealing an audio recording of Bardock defeating Gas.

Despite their efforts, Goku, Vegeta, and Granolah are defeated by Gas, who ages rapidly due to the battle. Frieza suddenly appear in front of them, and kills Gas and Elec, while revealing his new, god-like transformation, Black Frieza. Frieza easily defeats Goku and Vegeta, recruits Oil and Maki, and leaves. Whis heals Monaito and retrieves Goku and Vegeta, who wonder if the tyrant is now the universe’s strongest mortal.

Super Hero Saga
In an adaptation of the film Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero (2022), Commander Magenta, CEO of Red Pharmaceuticals and son of the late Commander Red, recruits Dr. Gero's surviving grandson and genius scientist Dr. Hedo to help revive the Red Ribbon Army and seek revenge on the Z fighters, while Goku, Vegeta, and Broly train under Whis on Lord Beerus' planet. The army sends one of their two latest androids, Gamma 2, to ambush Piccolo, who survives the attack and discovers the Red Ribbon Army's plan. He conjures a plan with Pan to lure Gohan to the base. Gohan attacks the base, and teams up with Piccolo to take on both Gamma 1 and Gamma 2, while trying to convince the androids that they are being manipulated. Before dying from a fatal stung by Hedo's spy robot, Hachimaru, Magenta activates Cell Max, a powerful and monstrous android based on Cell, as a last resort. Both Gamma androids realize their mistake, and assist Gohan and Piccolo to take on the new enemy; Bulma, Goten, Trunks, Android 18, and Krillin arrive as reinforcements. Gamma 2 sacrifices himself in a failed attempt to destroy Cell Max, while Gohan and Piccolo achieve new "Beast" and "Orange" forms, respectively. Gohan successfully defeats Cell Max with a Beast Mode: Special Beam Cannon. After the battle, a repentant Hedo and Gamma 1 are given job positions at Capsule Corporation. Later, after Goku, Vegeta and Broly learnt of the event from Whis, engaged in a mixed sparring session with Gohan, Goten and Trunks on Beerus' planet, before they return to Earth.

Production
When Dragon Ball Super was first announced, Akira Toriyama was reported to be credited for the "original story and character design concepts" of the anime, in addition to his regular role as series creator.[12] The official Japanese name of the series uses the ending suffix 超 which can translate as "super" but instead of using the traditional on'yomi Chō (ちょう) or kun'yomi Ko (こ) reading for the kanji, it is meant to be pronounced and read as Sūpā (スーパー), the English word for "super" in katakana. Other media in the series had done the same like the video game Super Dragon Ball Z (2005).

Toriyama explained his involvement with the "Future Trunks arc" by saying that he created the story based on suggestions from the editorial department, "As with last time, I wrote the overall plot outline, and the scriptwriters have been compiling and expanded the story content into individual episodes, making various changes and additions, and generally doing their best to make the story more interesting."[13] In addition to new characters designed by Toriyama, other characters for the "Universe Survival arc" were designed by Toyotarou, and a few by both.[14] After covering the last story arc seen in the anime series in November 2018, the Dragon Ball Super manga continues with original story arcs.[15]

For the "Galactic Patrol Prisoner arc", Toyotarou wanted the enemy Moro to be truly evil, like Piccolo Daimao was in the original Dragon Ball. He utilized elements of goats, a common Western demon motif, for the character and made his clothes shinigami-esque.[16] Because Jaco and the Galactic King have "classic alien"-like designs, Toyotarou wanted Merus to have a retro look as well and so gave him a silver bob cut. But he also gave the character bishōnen elements because he wanted him to be popular.[16] For the Yardratian race, who are mentioned but never appear in Toriyama's original Dragon Ball manga, Toyotarou and his editor Victory Uchida decided to use both the design seen in Dragon Ball Z and a design created by Toriyama.[16]

The "Granolah the Survivor arc" came about when Toyotarou created Granolah after having proposed various ideas for characters and being unsure if he should use existing characters or create new ones.[17] After settling on a new one connected to the Saiyans, he sent Granolah to his editor Victory Uchida. After the two brainstormed story ideas, he was then given the go-ahead to bring it to Toriyama, who came up with the plot proposal and added the group known as The Heeters.[17] It was Toriyama's decision to have the newly revealed backstory on the Namekian race. Toyotarou called it the "sort of huge decision" that he (Toyotarou) can not make.[17] Because Granolah's race went extinct in the story 50 years prior, Toyotarou made his clothing old-fashioned in addition to adding steampunk elements. After Toriyama reminded him that the Cerealians were not a warrior race but did enjoy fighting, Toyotarou imagined them as sharpshooters and gave Granolah his unique goggles. The goggles double as a communicator because he is a "lone warrior" and Toriyama had previously told him that having two characters converse better conveys characters' inner thoughts than having them talk to themselves. This led to the creation of the character Oatmeel.[17] Toyotarou's designs for The Heeters were rejected three or four times before he came up with the final version, while Toriyama designed the Sugarians after Toyotarou's first two designs were rejected.[17] Toriyama also designed the Namekian Monaito, whom he originally named "Slug" before it was changed to differentiate him from the character of the same name in the film Dragon Ball Z: Lord Slug (1991).[18]

The main story and postlude of the "Super Hero arc", chapters 91 to 103, were largely written by Toriyama, although Toyotarou made some additions.[19] With input by Toriyama, Toyotarou came up with the ideas for the prequel chapters 88 to 90, explaining; "I loved Gohan's high school arc [in the original manga] and wanted to place Trunks and Goten into that world."[19][20] The Saiyaman X costume was conceived by Toyotarou to be both "lame and cool", before Toriyama polished and completed the design.[20][21]

Manga production
Toyotarou, illustrator of the Dragon Ball Super manga, which began serialization before the anime began airing, explained that he received the major plot points from Toriyama, before drawing the storyboard and filling in the details himself. He would send the manga storyboard to Toriyama for review, who would edit the initial draft, making changes to dialogue and art, before sending it back to Toyotarou, thus illustrating the final draft and sending it to Shueisha for publication.[22]

After the death of Akira Toriyama in March 2024, the Dragon Ball Super manga has been put on an indefinite hiatus.[23]

Anime production
Toei Animation producer Atsushi Kido previously worked on Dragon Ball Z for a brief time during the Frieza arc, while Fuji TV producer Osamu Nozaki said he has been a fan of the series since childhood.[24] The Dragon Ball Super anime was originally directed by Masatoshi Chioka.[12] Morio Hatano, series director of Saint Seiya Omega (episodes #1–51), began sharing the series director credit with Chioka beginning with episode #28, before taking it over completely with #47. From episode #47 to #76, Morio Hatano shared the role of series director with Kōhei Hatano (no relation), another storyboard artist and episode director for the series.

Masako Nozawa reprises her roles as Son Goku, Son Gohan, and Son Goten.[12] Most of the original cast reprise their roles as well.[9][25] However, Jōji Yanami's roles as the North Kaio and the narrator were indefinitely taken over by Naoki Tatsuta as of episode 12, so that Yanami could take medical leave.[26] Kōichi Yamadera and Masakazu Morita also return as Beerus and Whis, respectively.[25]

The first preview of the series aired on June 14, 2015, following episode 164 of Dragon Ball Z Kai.[27] The next day, the main promotional image for Dragon Ball Super was added to its official website and unveiled two new characters,[25] who were later revealed to be named Champa and Vados, respectively.[28] A thirty-second trailer including the new characters was uploaded to the series' official website on June 26, 2015.[29]

The anime began airing on July 5, 2015, and was broadcast on Sundays at 9:00 a.m. on Fuji TV.[30][12] On January 19, 2018, it was revealed that Super's timeslot would be replaced with GeGeGe no Kitarō starting on April 1, 2018. According to Amazon Japan, the final Blu-ray set indicated the series' end at episode 131.[31] The series ended on March 25, 2018, with the conclusion of the "Universe Survival Saga". Fuji TV stated that there were no plans to continue the series.[32]

Music

"Chōzetsu☆Dynamic!"
Duration: 0 seconds.0:00
Sample of "Chōzetsu☆Dynamic!" performed by Kazuya Yoshii, the opening theme song for the first 76 episodes of the show.
Problems playing this file? See media help.
Norihito Sumitomo, the composer for Battle of Gods and Resurrection 'F', is scoring Dragon Ball Super.[33] An original soundtrack for the anime was released on CD by Nippon Columbia on February 24, 2016.[34]

The first opening theme song for episodes 1 to 76 is "Chōzetsu☆Dynamic!" (超絶☆ダイナミック！, Chōzetsu Dainamikku, "Excellent Dynamic!") by Kazuya Yoshii of The Yellow Monkey in both Japanese and English. The lyrics were penned by Yukinojo Mori who has written numerous songs for the Dragon Ball series.[35] The second opening theme song for episodes 77 to 131 is "Genkai Toppa × Survivor" (限界突破×サバイバー, "Limit Break × Survivor") by enka singer Kiyoshi Hikawa in Japanese and Nathan "NateWantsToBattle" Sharp in English. Mori wrote the lyrics for the rock song, while Takafumi Iwasaki composed the music.[36][37]

The first ending theme song for episodes 1 to 12 is "Hello Hello Hello" (ハローハローハロー, Harō Harō Harō) by Japanese rock band Good Morning America in Japanese and Jonathan Young in English.[35] The second ending theme song for episodes 13 to 25 is "Starring Star" (スターリングスター, Sutāringu Sutā) by the group Key Talk in Japanese and Professor Shyguy in English.[38][39] The third ending song for episodes 26 to 36 is "Usubeni" (薄紅, "Light Pink") by the band Lacco Tower in Japanese and Jeff Smith in English. The fourth ending theme song for episodes 37 to 49 is "Forever Dreaming" by Czecho No Republic in Japanese and Mystery Skulls in English.[40] The fifth ending theme song for episodes 50 to 59 is "Yokayoka Dance" (よかよかダンス, Yokayoka Dansu, "It's Fine Dance") by idol group Batten Showjo Tai in Japanese and Dani Artaud in English.[41] The sixth ending theme song for episodes 60 to 72 is "Chao Han Music" (炒飯MUSIC, Chāhan Myūjikku) by Arukara in Japanese and Elliot Coleman in English.[42] The seventh ending theme song for episodes 73 to 83 is "Aku no Tenshi to Seigi no Akuma" (悪の天使と正義の悪魔, "Evil Angel and Righteous Devil") by The Collectors in Japanese and William Kubley in English.[43] The eighth ending theme song for episodes 84 to 96 is "Boogie Back" by Miyu Inoue in Japanese and Lizzy Land in English.[44][45] The ninth ending theme song for episodes 97 to 108 is "Haruka" (遥) by Lacco Tower in Japanese and Zachary J. Willis in English.[46] The tenth ending theme song for episodes 109 to 121 is "70cm Shiho no Madobe" (70cm四方の窓辺, "By a 70cm Square Window") by RottenGraffty in Japanese and Lawrence B. Park in English.[47][48] The eleventh ending theme song for episodes 122 to 131 is "Lagrima" by OnePixcel in Japanese and Amanda "AmaLee/LeeandLie/Monarch" Lee in English.[49]

Media
Manga
Further information: List of Dragon Ball Super chapters
Dragon Ball Super is illustrated by artist Toyotarou, who was previously responsible for the official Resurrection 'F' manga adaptation, began serialization in the August 2015 issue of V Jump, which was released on June 20, 2015.[50][51] Shueisha periodically collects the chapters into tankōbon volumes, with the first released on April 4, 2016.[52] Viz Media began posting free English translations of the manga chapters to their website on June 24, 2016.[53] A print release of the first volume followed in spring 2017.[54]

Anime
Further information: List of Dragon Ball Super episodes
The anime television series was produced by Toei Animation, with individual episodes written by different screenwriters, and aired on Fuji TV from July 2015 to March 2018. The first 27 episodes readapt the events of the Battle of Gods and Resurrection 'F' films. The series ran for 131 episodes, broadcast from July 5, 2015, to March 25, 2018, on FNS (Fuji TV).

An English-subtitled simulcast of Dragon Ball Super was made available in North America and Europe through Crunchyroll and Daisuki.[55] Following the closure of Daisuki, the hosted Dragon Ball Super episodes were transferred to the Dragon Ball Super Card Game website in February 2018 and was available until March 29, 2019.[56][57] On November 4, 2016, Funimation (currently known as Crunchyroll, LLC) announced the company acquired the rights to Dragon Ball Super through Toei Animation USA and would be producing an English dub, with many cast members of their previous English-language releases of Dragon Ball media reprising their respective roles. As well as officially announcing the dub, it was also announced they would be simulcasting the series on their streaming platform, FunimationNow.[58][59] The Funimation English dub of Dragon Ball Super began airing on Adult Swim on Saturdays at 8 p.m., with an encore showing in their Toonami block later that night at 11:30 p.m. starting on January 7, 2017, alongside Dragon Ball Z Kai: The Final Chapters.[60][61][62][63] Toei Animation Asia-Pacific has commissioned a separate English-language dub of Dragon Ball Super produced by Los Angeles-based Bang Zoom! Entertainment for the Asian market. It premiered on the Toonami channel in Southeast Asia (excluding Malaysia) and India on January 21, 2017.[64] A sneak preview of the English dub's first episode aired on December 17, 2016.[65] Production on the Bang Zoom! dub ended after episode 27 as Toonami Asia and India ceased transmission. Later in March 2022, Cartoon Network started airing Dragon Ball Super in Hindi, Tamil, and Telegu. The first 26 episodes being licensed by Toei Asia-Pacific (Bang Zoom!) and the rest by Toei itself using the OkraTron 5000 dub.[66][67][68] In Australia, ABC Me started airing the series on November 3, 2018, with a new episode every Saturday at 2:45 pm. In the United Kingdom, the series aired on Pop from July 1, 2019, with episodes first airing at 7 pm on weekdays. As of 2022, the series now airs on CBBC and can also be found on BBC iPlayer.[69][70]

Films
Further information: List of Dragon Ball films
An animated film, Dragon Ball Super: Broly, was the first film in the Dragon Ball franchise to be produced under the Super chronology. Released on December 14, 2018, with a new art style, most of the film is set after the "Universe Survival" story arc (the beginning of the movie takes place in the past).[71] A second Dragon Ball Super film was confirmed to be in pre-production on June 4, 2019, by Toei executive Akio Iyoku. Iyoku feels that the film's original story "will probably be totally different [from Broly]."[72][73] On July 23, 2021, the sequel's official title was revealed as Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero.[74] The film was released in Japan on April 22, 2022,[75][76][77] and internationally on August 19, 2022.[78][79][80]

Home video
In Japan, the anime series was released on DVD and Blu-ray by Happinet between December 2015 and July 2018, with each "box" also containing textless opening and closing credits sequences and packaged with a booklet.[81] In North America, Funimation began releasing the series from July 2017, again on both DVD and Blu-ray, containing both English-dubbed and English-subtitled Japanese versions; the Blu-ray releases generally also contain interviews with the English cast and textless opening/closing credits sequences. Funimation's localized releases are distributed in the United Kingdom and Australasia by Manga Entertainment and Madman Entertainment respectively.

Japanese
Name	Date	Discs	Episodes
Box 1	
December 2, 2015[82]
2	
1–12
Box 2	
March 2, 2016[83]
2	
13–24
Box 3	
July 2, 2016[84]
2	
25–36
Box 4	
October 4, 2016[85]
2	
37–48
Box 5	
January 6, 2017[86]
2	
49–60
Box 6	
April 4, 2017[87]
2	
61–72
Box 7	
August 2, 2017[88]
2	
73–84
Box 8	
October 3, 2017[89]
2	
85–96
Box 9	
January 6, 2018[90]
2	
97–108
Box 10	
April 3, 2018[91]
2	
109–120
Box 11	
July 3, 2018[92]
2	
121–131
Complete Box 1	
February 2, 2022[93]
12	
1–72
Complete Box 2	
March 3, 2022[94]
10	
73–131
English
Name	Date	Discs	Episodes
Region 1/A	Region 2/B	Region 4/B
Part One	
July 25, 2017[95]
October 30, 2017[96]
September 6, 2017[97]
2	
1–13
Part Two	
October 3, 2017[98]
January 29, 2018[99]
December 6, 2017[100]
2	
14–26
Part Three	
February 20, 2018[101]
June 4, 2018[102]
March 7, 2018[103]
2	
27–39
Part Four	
June 19, 2018[104]
August 6, 2018[105]
August 15, 2018[106]
2	
40–52
Part Five	
October 2, 2018[107]
October 8, 2018[108]
December 5, 2018[109]
2	
53–65
Part Six	
January 8, 2019[110]
February 18, 2019[111]
March 6, 2019[112]
2	
66–78
Part Seven	
April 2, 2019[113]
September 23, 2019[114]
June 5, 2019[115]
2	
79–91
Part Eight	
July 2, 2019[116]
October 28, 2019[114]
September 4, 2019[117]
2	
92–104
Part Nine	
October 8, 2019[118]
December 9, 2019[119]
December 4, 2019[120]
2	
105–117
Part Ten	
January 14, 2020[121]
January 20, 2020[122]
March 4, 2020[123]
2	
118–131
Collection 1	—	—	
December 5, 2018[124]
8	
1–52
Collection 2	—	—	
October 9, 2019[125]
8	
53–104
Collection 3	—	—	
October 7, 2020[126]
4	
105–131
Complete Collection	
September 20, 2022[127]
November 2, 2020[128]
November 18, 2020[129]
20	
1–131
Merchandise
Bandai announced that a line of Dragon Ball Super toys would be available in the United States in summer 2017.[130] Bandai has also announced the updated Dragon Ball Super Card Game that starts with one starter deck, one special pack containing 4 booster packs and a promotional Vegeta card and a booster box with 24 packs. It was released on July 28, 2017.[131] A line of six Dragon Ball Super Happy Meal toys were made available at Japanese McDonald's restaurants in May 2017.[132]

Reception
Manga reception
All four volumes of Dragon Ball Super's manga adaptation have charted on Oricon's weekly list of the best-selling manga; volumes one and two sold 29,995 and 56,947 copies in their debut weeks respectively.[133][134] Volume three was the fourth best-selling for its week with 92,114 copies sold,[135] and volume four was fourth its week with 150,889.[136] According to Nielsen BookScan, the English version of volume one was the second best-selling graphic novel of May 2017,[137] the ninth of June,[138] the fourteenth of July,[139] and the eighteenth of August.[140] Dragon Ball Super volume 4 topped NPD BookScan's graphic novels list for January 2019.[141] In The New York Times' Graphic Books and Manga bestseller monthly list, the sixth volume ranked fourteenth for October 2019;[142] eighth volume was fifteenth of April 2020;[143] fifteenth volume was twelfth of February 2022;[144] sixteenth volume was thirteenth of September;[145] eighteenth volume was seventh of July 2023;[146] and the nineteenth volume ranked eleventh of October.[147]

In Japan, the manga's tankōbon volumes 1 and 2 sold 594,342 copies by June 2017,[148] volume 3 sold 236,720 copies by July 2017,[149] volume 4 sold 267,417 copies by November 2017,[150] volume 5 sold 400,000 copies by April 2018,[151] volume 6 sold 216,871 copies by June 2018,[152] volume 7 sold 208,796 copies by September 2018,[153] volume 8 sold 314,269 copies by January 2019,[154][155] volume 9 sold 188,027 copies by April 2019,[156][157] volume 10 sold 196,204 copies by August 2019,[158][159][160] volume 11 sold 119,283 copies by December 2019,[161] volume 12 sold 146,305 copies by April 2020,[162][163] volume 13 sold 155,095 copies by August 2020,[164][165] volumen 14 sold 95,101 copies by December 2020,[166] volumen 15 sold 150,971 copies by April 2021,[167][168] volume 16 sold 107,812 copies by August 2021,[169] volume 17 sold 156,744 copies by December 2021[170][171][172] and volume 18 sold 193,333 copies by April 2022.[173] According to Oricon's Yearly Sales Ranking 2020 - Top 50, Dragon Ball Super ranked at #38 with Yearly Sales - 1,019,655 Copies Sales.[174][175] This adds up to at least 3,747,280 tankōbon copies sold in Japan by April 2022.

Tom Speelman of ComicsAlliance noted that Toyotarou's condensed and altered versions of the Battle of Gods and Resurrection 'F' arcs made it a lot easier to speed through and added suspense. He also said that for the first time he could not decide whether the anime or manga was superior.[176]

Despite the series' popularity, Goku's characterization was the subject of negative feedback, with ComicVerse citing his pacifism to villains.[177][178] La Tercera went to call Goku irresponsible and immature to the character for helping Moro as a result of this show of mercy and the consequences.[179] Both Goku and Vegeta were criticized for being too overpowered in Super to the point they steal the series' spotlight to the supporting cast while their strategies either lack complexity or create a plothole such as the time limit to the fusion Vegito.[180]

Anime reception
The anime adaption received generally positive reviews from critics and fans. The first episode was highly praised from initial reactions for its improved quality.[181] Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku praised the series' title sequence and said "My middle-school self is so happy right now, you guys."[182] Jamieson Cox of The Verge also praised the title sequence and said that "Dragon Ball Super's intro will have you begging for its North American release". Cox was also surprised that, considering how popular the franchise is, the series did not launch internationally at the same time. He called it "a move that wouldn't be unprecedented" giving Sailor Moon Crystal as an example.[183]


The original animation for episode five (left) was widely criticized by viewers and was redrawn for Blu-ray and DVD release (right)
However, the fifth episode received harshly negative responses from Japanese and Western audiences due to its poor animation style compared to the previous four episodes. These problems continued at episode twenty-four, and several more episodes onward. Dragon Ball Kai and Resurrection 'F' producer Norihiro Hayashida felt that the criticism was overblown. He said that people were criticizing the entire series based on a few bad sequences that were done by new animators. He went on to explain a quality decline in the anime industry that he believes is the result of studios cutting time given for post-production and not allowing for reviews of the final product.[184][185][186]

Despite this, the Champa arc was praised for improving its animation. Episode 39 was noted improved animation and praised fighting sequences. Attack of the Fanboy reported that "Dragon Ball Super" episode 39 may be the best installment of the series to date.[187] Goku and Hit's fight "starts off explosively from the get-go."[188] The Future Trunks arc also garnered positive response from fans and critics alike. IGN's Shawn Saris acclaiming episode 66, stating that, "episode 66 of Dragon Ball Super has a few missteps but ultimately leads to a great final battle with Zamasu."[189] Anime News Network criticized the poor animation but praised the Goku Black narrative as "the most Super has allowed itself to be a shameless soap opera" based on the handling of the cast.[190] In the same arc, Den of Geek noted Gohan's lighthearted self was not fit for Trunks' dark storyline and heavily contrasted the previous characterizations of Gohan Trunks used to see.[191] In a later review, the same site enjoyed how the anime mocked Gohan's heroic persona but had mixed feelings in regards to its handling in gag episode. The site addressed fans' complaints about how Gohan's character was nearly forgotten by the staff members as well as his marriage with Videll.[192]

The final arc, Universe Survival arc, particularly episodes, 109/110 and 116 have been cited as some of the Super series' best episodes due to Goku's new power up form known as the Ultra Instinct;[193][194] Despite this praise, Jay Gibbs of ComicsVerse criticized the series for its inconsistent narrative, having heard "an explanation within an episode, then see that very explanation invalidated seconds later."[195] Sam Leach from Anime News Network noted that fans of the series tend to joke Piccolo is a better paternal figure to Gohan than his actual father, Goku, and felt that Dragon Ball Super emphasized it more when Piccolo started training him again for this arc.[196] On the other hand, Leach criticized how Super tries to teach "life lessons" to a mature Gohan. The fact that Piccolo calls him "arrogant", despite Gohan's kindness and humility, was seen as a bad plot point by the reviewer.[197]

The United States premiere of Dragon Ball Super obtained 1,063,000 viewers for its 8 p.m. showing on Adult Swim.[198] Episodes 130 and 131 were live streamed in various cities across Latin American countries including Mexico, El Salvador, Bolivia, Ecuador, and Nicaragua for free in public venues.[199][200] The public screenings drew large record audiences, which included filling stadiums in Mexico and other Latin American countries,[201] with each screening drawing audiences numbering in the thousands to the tens of thousands.[202]

Even though the fan reaction has been positive, Dragon Ball Super has been criticized by fans for lacking the blood and gore that was present in its predecessor Dragon Ball Z. This is, however, due to the fact that the series is targeted towards a younger demographic than the previous installments, and as such, censorship would not allow such content to be shown on a television program targeted towards children.[203] A Dragon Ball Super episode received a major complaint by Japan's Broadcasting Ethics and Program Improvement Organization as the part of the story involved Master Roshi making multiple sexual attacks on the female character Yurin.[204]

Accolades
2017 Crunchyroll Anime Awards:[205]

Best Continuing Series – Dragon Ball Super – Nominated
2018 Crunchyroll Anime Awards:[206]

Best Fight Scene (Presented by Capcom) – Jiren vs. Goku – Nominated
Best Continuing Series (Presented by VRV) – Dragon Ball Super – Winner[207][208]
Notes
 In North America through Crunchyroll, LLC (formerly known as Funimation), in the United Kingdom through Crunchyroll UK and Ireland (formerly known as Manga Entertainment) and in Australia through Madman Anime.
 This arc was not adapted in the manga; instead its events were summarized at the beginning of the Universe 6 Saga.
 This film was not adapted; instead its events were summarized at the beginning of this saga.
References
 "Read a Free Preview of Dragon Ball Super, Vol. 1". Viz Media. Archived from the original on April 14, 2019. Retrieved August 13, 2018.
 Cold Cobra (June 13, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super – Volume 1 Review". Anime UK News. Archived from the original on June 25, 2023. Retrieved August 12, 2019.
 "CBBC - Dragon Ball Super". Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved April 23, 2023.
 "映画『ドラゴンボールＺ』 2013年３月30日（土）超拡大公開！" [Movie "Dragon Ball Z" to Be Super-Wide Released on Saturday, March 30, 2013!]. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved December 30, 2016.
 Waugh, J. R. (October 11, 2024). "Dragon Ball Daima's Timeline Placement Officially Confirmed In Episode #1". ScreenRant. Retrieved February 20, 2025.
 "Dragon Ball Super TV Anime Debuts on July 5". Anime News Network. February 20, 2025. Retrieved February 20, 2025.
 "Everything We Know About Dragon Ball Super's 2025 Comeback". Comic Book Resources. December 21, 2024. Retrieved December 21, 2024.
 "あらすじ｜ドラゴンボール超" [Synopsis | Dragon Ball Super] (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2015.
 作品情報 [Credits] (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Super' Anime's New Arc Releases In February". iDigitalTimes.com. December 20, 2016. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved February 3, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Anime Reveals Story, Visual for 'Universe Survival' Arc". Anime News Network. December 15, 2016. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved December 17, 2016.
 "Dragon Ball Gets 1st New TV Anime in 18 Years in July". Anime News Network. April 28, 2015. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball TV Anime 30th Anniversary News – Part 2!". Toei Animation. June 24, 2016. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2016.
 "超SCOOP3 新章「宇宙サバイバル編」 サバイバル!!全12宇宙". V Jump (in Japanese) (April 2017). Shueisha: 36–37. February 21, 2017. ASIN B01N6Y2ZTB.
 "Dragon Ball Super Manga Launches 'Galactic Patrol Prisoner Arc' Next Month". Anime News Network. November 21, 2018. Archived from the original on November 21, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2018.
 "『ドラゴンボール超』11巻発売記念！とよたろう先生直撃インタビュー&仕事場を大公開‼" ["Dragon Ball Super" Volume 11 Release Special! Exclusive Interview with Toyotarou & a Full Look Inside His Workspace‼]. Dragon Ball Official Site (in Japanese). Shueisha. December 3, 2019. Archived from the original on December 8, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2022.
 "Weekly Dragon Ball News Special Edition: Interview with Toyotarou!". Dragon Ball Official Site. Shueisha. August 9, 2021. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2022.
 Toriyama, Akira; Toyotarou (2022) [2021]. Dragon Ball Super. Vol. 16. Viz Media. p. 190. ISBN 978-1-9747-3211-1.
 "Celebrating the 100th Chapter of Dragon Ball Super & ULTRA Ultra Instinct Goku -Sign- Coming to Dragon Ball Legends! Toyotarou Goes In-Depth on His Collab Illustration!". Dragon Ball Official Site. Shueisha. March 21, 2024. Archived from the original on August 3, 2024. Retrieved August 3, 2024.
 "Toyotaro Details How Involved Akira Toriyama Was in Dragon Ball Super Manga". Anime News Network. July 21, 2024. Archived from the original on July 26, 2024. Retrieved August 3, 2024.
 "[鳥山明ほぼ全仕事] 1日おきに更新24時間限定公開！ 2024/08/02" [[Akira Toriyama: Almost All Works] Updated Every Other Day, 24-Hour Limited Release! 2024/08/02]. Dragon Ball Official Site (in Japanese). Shueisha. August 2, 2024. Archived from the original on August 2, 2024. Retrieved August 3, 2024.
 "Interview: Dragon Ball Super's Toyotarou". Anime News Network. October 26, 2016. Archived from the original on October 28, 2016. Retrieved October 29, 2016.
 "Dragon Ball Super Manga Goes on Indefinite Hiatus". Anime News Network. March 21, 2024. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved April 16, 2024.
 "Toei Animation Begins Production on Dragon Ball Super" (PDF) (Press release). Tokyo: Toei Animation. April 28, 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 13, 2015. Retrieved May 9, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Super Main Visual Reveals 2 New Characters". Anime News Network. June 15, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2015.
 "Naoki Tatsuta Temporarily Replaces Jouji Yanami as Kaiō/Narrator in Dragon Ball Super Anime". Anime News Network. September 25, 2015. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2016.
 "Dragon Ball Super TV Anime Teased in 1st Preview Video". Anime News Network. June 13, 2015. Archived from the original on January 20, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2015.
 "「ドラゴンボール超」新キャラ登場のビジュアル、Vジャンではマンガ版始動" ["Dragon Ball Super" unveils visual of a new character; manga version begins in V Jump.]. Natalie (in Japanese). June 20, 2015. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Super's Extended Commercial Introduces New Characters". Anime News Network. June 26, 2015. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved June 26, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Super TV Anime Debuts on July 5". Anime News Network. June 4, 2015. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2015.
 ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX11, Happinet, archived from the original on August 4, 2024, retrieved January 19, 2018
 "Bye for now, Goku! 'Dragon Ball Super' to make way for new 'Gegege no Kitaro' anime". Japan Today. January 26, 2018. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2018.
 Seeto, Damian (May 31, 2015). "Composer Returns To Score Dragon Ball Super TV Series". attackofthefanboy.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved May 27, 2015.
 "日本コロムビア | ドラゴンボール超 オリジナルサウンドトラック" [Nippon Columbia | Dragon Ball Super Original Soundtrack]. 日本コロムビア | ドラゴンボール超 オリジナルサウンドトラック. March 7, 2016. Archived from the original on May 27, 2020. Retrieved March 7, 2016.
 "Kazuya Yoshii, Good Morning America to Perform Theme Songs For Dragon Ball Super". Anime News Network. May 19, 2015. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2016.
 "Gods And Heroes Of 'Dragon Ball Super – Universal Survival Arc' Gathered For New Opening Preview Shots". Crunchyroll. February 4, 2017. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super's New Opening Sequence Previewed in Screenshots". Anime News Network. February 4, 2017. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved February 5, 2017.
 "VIDEO: KEYTALK Performs New ED Song for 'Dragon Ball Super'". Crunchyroll. October 1, 2015. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved January 24, 2016.
 @ProfessorShyguy (May 15, 2017). "I'd like to thank @FUNimation for having me sing the new Dragon Ball Super outro! So very surreal, so very rad" (Tweet). Retrieved June 8, 2017 – via Twitter.
 "Dragon Ball Super to Introduce a New Theme This April". attackofthefanboy. March 17, 2016. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 17, 2016.
 "Batten Showjo Tai Performs New Dragon Ball Super Ending Theme". Anime News Network. June 19, 2016. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2016.
 "Rock Band Arukara Performs New Dragon Ball Super Ending Theme". Anime News Network. September 21, 2016. Archived from the original on September 28, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2016.
 "THE COLLECTORS Perform New "Dragon Ball Super" Ending Theme". Crunchyroll. December 6, 2016. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Retrieved January 8, 2017.
 "Spring's "Dragon Ball Super" End Theme Revealed". Crunchyroll. March 5, 2017. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved April 9, 2017.
 "Miyu Inoue Sings New Dragon Ball Super Ending Theme Song". Anime News Network. March 5, 2017. Archived from the original on April 10, 2017. Retrieved April 9, 2017.
 "Lacco Tower Returns For New "Dragon Ball Super" Ending". Crunchyroll. June 5, 2017. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved July 2, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super To Get New Ending". Comicbook. September 13, 2017. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017.
 "RottenGraffty To Perform New "Dragon Ball Super" Ending". Crunchyroll. September 7, 2017. Archived from the original on October 10, 2017. Retrieved October 9, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Announces New Ending Theme". Comicbook. December 18, 2017. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 18, 2017.
 鳥山明ストーリー原案の「ドラゴンボール」新アニメ、Vジャンでコミカライズ. Natalie (in Japanese). May 21, 2015. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2015.
 Chiok, Christian (May 16, 2015). "Dragon Ball Super To Get A Manga Adaptation As Well". shonengamez.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 "ドラゴンボール超 1" (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on November 6, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2016.
 "Viz Previews Dragon Ball, Naruto, Tokyo Ghoul Spinoff Manga in English". Anime News Network. June 25, 2016. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2016.
 "Viz Manga Adds Dragon Ball Super, Gundam Thunderbolt, Rei Tōma's The Water Dragon's Bride". Anime News Network. July 1, 2016. Archived from the original on September 23, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2016.
 Hodgkins, Crystalyn (May 28, 2017). "Crunchyroll Adds More Catalog Titles, Adds Dragon Ball Super for Europe". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved January 19, 2019.
 "DAISUKI END OF SERVICE NOTICE". Daisuki. Archived from the original on March 18, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2019.
 "Anime". Dragon Ball Super Card Game. Archived from the original on March 1, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2019.
 ""DRAGON BALL SUPER" SUBTITLED EPISODES BEGIN STREAMING TODAY ON FUNIMATIONNOW WITH NEW SIMULCAST EPISODES STARTING NOVEMBER 5, 2016. Funimation to Produce English Dub of New Series". Funimation. Funimation. November 4, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
 "Funimation Licenses Dragon Ball Super, Plans English Dub". Anime News Network. November 4, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2016.
 Dornbush, Jonathon (December 7, 2016). "Dragon Ball Super English Dub to Premiere on Adult Swim's Toonami in January". IGN. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved January 7, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super to Premiere on Toonami in January". Anime News Network. December 8, 2016. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved December 12, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball Z Kai's Buu Saga to Air on Toonami". Anime News Network. December 8, 2016. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved December 12, 2020.
 "Toonami: Hope you're sitting down for this..." Facebook. September 7, 2016. Archived from the original on March 13, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2016.
 "Bang Zoom Produces Toonami Asia's Dragon Ball Super English Dub for SE Asia". Anime News Network. November 29, 2016. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020.
 "Toonami Asia Premieres Dragon Ball Super Anime on January 21". Anime News Network. November 28, 2016. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved November 29, 2016.
 @TamaraRyanVO (November 30, 2017). "@ShaunInce123 @Huzaahmed @Ripper_30 I haven't been called in almost 6 months, so I am assuming no" (Tweet). Retrieved January 22, 2018 – via Twitter.
 "Manga online". www.zazamanga.com. Retrieved May 6, 2025.
 "AFTER ANIMAX INDIA, ANOTHER FAVOURITE CHANNEL WILL BITE THE DUSTS SOON!". www.facebook.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2018.
 Osmond, Andrew (June 20, 2019). "Dragon Ball Super Will Screen on POP Channel". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 20, 2019. Retrieved June 20, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super". TVGuide.co.uk. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2019.
 "'Dragon Ball' 20th Movie Reveals First Poster". March 12, 2018. Archived from the original on March 23, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018.
 Stevens, Colin (June 4, 2019). "New Dragon Ball Super Movie Is in the Works". IGN. Retrieved August 30, 2019.
 "Toei Announces New Dragon Ball Super Anime Film for 2022". Anime News Network. May 8, 2021. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved May 8, 2021.
 Goslin, Austen (July 23, 2021). "The new Dragon Ball Super movie is Dragon Ball Super: Superhero". Polygon. Archived from the original on July 23, 2021. Retrieved July 23, 2021.
 Loo, Egan (March 18, 2022). "Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero Film Delayed Due to Toei Animation Hack". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2022.
 "Result of Investigation of Unauthorized Network Access". Toei Animation. April 28, 2022. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved July 30, 2022.
 Harding, Daryl (May 20, 2022). "Dragon Ball Super: SUPER HERO's Japanese Release Battles Its Way Onto IMAX, 4DX". Crunchyroll. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022.
 Harding, Daryl (May 19, 2022). "Dragon Ball Super: SUPER HERO's Japanese Release Battles Its Way Onto IMAX, 4DX". Crunchyroll. Archived from the original on May 20, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2024.
 Michael, Thomas (August 21, 2023). "Where to Watch 'Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero': Streaming, Digital, DVD, and Blu-ray". Collider. Archived from the original on September 27, 2023. Retrieved June 13, 2024.
 Del Rosario, Alexandra (May 10, 2022). "Crunchyroll, Toei Animation Set 'Dragon Ball Super: Super Hero' Summer Theatrical Release". Deadline. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2024.
 "Blu-ray・DVD情報｜ドラゴンボール超 東映アニメーション" [Blu-ray & DVD Information | Dragon Ball Super Toei Animation] (in Japanese). Toei Animation. Archived from the original on July 20, 2015. Retrieved January 24, 2016.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 1" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 2" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 3" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 4" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 5" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 6" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 7" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 8" (in Japanese). Neowing. July 28, 2017. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 9" (in Japanese). Neowing. September 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 10" (in Japanese). Neowing. September 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 Blu-ray BOX 11" (in Japanese). Neowing. September 30, 2017. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017.
 "ドラゴンボール超 TVシリーズ コンプリートBlu-ray BOX 上巻" [Dragon Ball Super TV Series Complete Blu-ray Box Set Part 1] (in Japanese). Neowing. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2022.
 "ドラゴンボール超 TVシリーズ コンプリートDVD BOX 下巻" [Dragon Ball Super TV Series Complete DVD Box Set Part 2] (in Japanese). Neowing. Archived from the original on May 12, 2022. Retrieved May 11, 2022.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 1". Funimation. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Season 1 Part 1 (Episodes 1–13)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 1 (Eps 1–13)". Madman Entertainment. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 2". Funimation. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Season 1 Part 2 (Episodes 14–26)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 2 (Eps 14 – 26)". Madman Entertainment. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 3". Funimation. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 3 (Episodes 27–39)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 3 (Eps 27–39)". Madman Entertainment. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 4". Funimation. Archived from the original on March 17, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 4 (Episodes 40–52)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 4 (Eps 40–52)". Madman Entertainment. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 5". Funimation. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 5 (Episodes 53–65)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 5 (Eps 53–65)". Madman Entertainment. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on January 11, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 6". Funimation. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 6 (Episodes 66–78)". Manga. Manga Entertainment Ltd. Archived from the original on June 16, 2019. Retrieved December 19, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 6 (Eps 66–78) (Blu-Ray)". Madman Business to Business. Madman Entertainment Pty. Ltd. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved December 21, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 7". Funimation. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2019.
 Manga Entertainment [@MangaUK] (August 2, 2019). "Please note that Dragon Ball Super Part 7 will now be released on September 23rd and Part 8 on October 28th. We apologise for any disappointment or inconvenience caused!" (Tweet). Retrieved August 2, 2019 – via Twitter.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 7 (Eps 79–91) (Blu-Ray)". Madman Business to Business. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved March 2, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 8". Funimation. Archived from the original on May 20, 2019. Retrieved June 29, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 8 (Eps 92–104) (Blu-Ray)". Madman Business to Business. Archived from the original on August 11, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 9". Funimation. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019.
 Stevens, Josh (August 2, 2019). "Manga UK to release Goblin Slayer, Fruits Basket and more!". Anime UK News. Archived from the original on August 2, 2019. Retrieved August 2, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 9 (Eps 105–117) (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Part 10". Funimation. Archived from the original on October 20, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019.
 "Manga Entertainment Reveals Q1 2020 UK Anime Schedule, Featuring Attack on Titan, Rising of the Shield Hero, ZOMBIE LAND SAGA & More". Anime UK News. October 30, 2019. Archived from the original on October 30, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Part 10 (Eps 118–131) (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Collection 1 (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 14, 2019. Retrieved May 12, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super Collection 2 (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on August 12, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2019.
 "Dragon Ball Super Collection 3 (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on July 3, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball Super: The Complete Series - Limited Edition Steelbook Gift Set". Amazon. September 20, 2022. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved June 25, 2022.
 Osmond, Andrew. "Manga Entertainment Will Release Complete Dragon Ball Super Blu-ray Collection on November 2". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball Super Complete Collection (Blu-Ray)". Madman Entertainment. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2020.
 Green, Scott (October 4, 2016). ""Dragon Ball Super" Toys Headed To US In Summer 2017". Crunchyroll. Otter Media. Archived from the original on October 5, 2016. Retrieved October 4, 2016.
 Bunge, Nicole (February 24, 2017). "'Dragon Ball Super Card Game' Launches This Summer". ICv2. Hard copy. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved February 24, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball To Power Up McDonald's Happy Meal Toys". comicbook.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved October 16, 2017.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, April 4–10". Anime News Network. April 13, 2016. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2017.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, November 28 – December 4". Anime News Network. December 7, 2016. Archived from the original on June 12, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2017.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, May 29 – June 4". Anime News Network. June 7, 2017. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017. Retrieved June 10, 2017.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, October 30 – November 5". Anime News Network. November 8, 2017. Archived from the original on April 16, 2023. Retrieved November 8, 2017.
 "MAY 2017 BOOKSCAN—TOP 20 ADULT GRAPHIC NOVELS". ICV2. June 2, 2017. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved June 10, 2017.
 "JUNE 2017 BOOKSCAN – TOP 20 ADULT GRAPHIC NOVELS". ICV2. July 14, 2017. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2017.
 "JULY 2017 BOOKSCAN TOP 20 ADULT GRAPHIC NOVELS". ICV2. August 3, 2017. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2017.
 "AUGUST 2017 BOOKSCAN TOP 20 ADULT GRAPHIC NOVELS". ICV2. September 1, 2017. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved September 1, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Manga Tops U.S. Monthly Bookscan January List". Anime News Network. February 21, 2019. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved March 25, 2019.
 Pineda, Rafael Antonio (October 3, 2019). "Dragon Ball Super Ranks #14 on New York Times' Graphic Books Bestseller List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Mateo, Alex (April 4, 2020). "One-Punch Man Ranks #11 on New York Times' Graphic Books Bestseller's April List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Hazra, Adriana (February 6, 2022). "Manga Takes 10 of 15 Spots on NYT February Bestseller List for Graphic Novels, Manga". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Hazra, Adriana (September 11, 2022). "Jujutsu Kaisen, Spy×Family, More Rank on NYT September Bestseller List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Hazra, Adriana (July 16, 2023). "Dragon Ball Super, 'Goodbye, Eri,' Demon Slayer Rank on NYT July Bestseller List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Tai, Anita (October 9, 2023). "My Hero Academia, Jujutsu Kaisen, Dragon Ball Super Rank on NYT October Bestseller List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 9, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2023.
 Ressler, Karen (June 14, 2017). "Japanese Comic Ranking, June 5–11". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2018.
 Ressler, Karen (July 6, 2017). "Japanese Comic Ranking, June 26 – July 2". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on February 19, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2018.
 Ressler, Karen (November 29, 2017). "Japanese Comic Ranking, November 20–26". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved August 21, 2018.
 "Manga With Biggest 1st Printings from Kodansha, Shogakukan, Shueisha: 2017–2018". Anime News Network. April 7, 2018. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2018.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, June 18–24". Anime News Network. June 27, 2018. Archived from the original on October 26, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2018.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, September 17–23". Anime News Network. September 26, 2018. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018.
 "Japanese Comic Ranking, December 31 – January 6". Anime News Network. January 12, 2019. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved March 24, 2019.
 "Top-Selling Manga in Japan by Volume: 2019 (First Half)". Anime News Network. May 29, 2019. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved August 25, 2019.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (April 01, 2019 – April 07, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 15, 2019. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (April 08, 2019 – April 14, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 22, 2019. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (July 29, 2019 – August 04, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 12, 2019. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (August 05, 2019 – August 11, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 19, 2019. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (August 12, 2019 – August 18, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 26, 2019. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (December 02, 2019 – December 08, 2019)". Oricon (in Japanese). December 16, 2019. Archived from the original on January 5, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (March 30, 2020 – April 05, 2020)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 13, 2020. Archived from the original on April 11, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (April 06, 2020 – April 12, 2020)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 20, 2020. Archived from the original on April 19, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (August 03, 2020 – August 09, 2020)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 17, 2020. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (August 10, 2020 – August 16, 2020)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 24, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2020.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (November 30, 2020 – December 06, 2020)". Oricon (in Japanese). December 14, 2020. Archived from the original on December 11, 2020. Retrieved April 27, 2021.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (March 29, 2021 – April 04, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 12, 2021. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (April 05, 2021 – April 11, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). April 19, 2021. Archived from the original on April 27, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2021.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (August 02, 2021 – August 08, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). August 16, 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2022.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (November 29, 2021 – December 05, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). December 13, 2021. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2022.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (December 06, 2021 – December 12, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). December 20, 2021. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2022.
 "Weekly Comic Ranking (December 13, 2021 – December 19, 2021)". Oricon (in Japanese). December 27, 2021. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2022.
 "Best Selling Manga In Japan In April 2022". Animehunch. May 7, 2022. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved May 13, 2022.
 "Here Are the Top 50 Manga of the Last Year". February 17, 2021. Archived from the original on August 4, 2024. Retrieved August 15, 2021.
 @WSJ_manga (February 17, 2021). "Oricon's Yearly Sales Ranking 2020 - Top 50" (Tweet) – via Twitter.
 "Screen & Page: Summon the Super Saiyan God In 'Dragon Ball Super'". ComicsAlliance. February 3, 2017. Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2018.
 "Dragon Ball Super: las Semillas del Ermitaño perderían su importancia". IGN. December 27, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball: estos son todos los villanos a los que Goku les ha dado la Semilla del Ermitaño". IGN. October 30, 2020. Retrieved November 9, 2020.
 "Gokú demuestra que no ha aprendido nada en el manga de Dragon Ball Super". La Tercera. October 20, 2020. Retrieved December 16, 2021.
 Gibbs, Jay (September 3, 2017). "It's Time to Admit that DRAGON BALL SUPER is Terrible". ComicsVerse. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 Seeto, Damian (July 4, 2015). "Dragon Ball Super First Impressions On Debut Episode". attackofthefanboy.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 Eisenbeis, Richard (July 5, 2015). "Dragon Ball Super's Intro Makes My Inner Child So Happy". Kotaku. Gawker Media. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2015.
 Cox, Jamieson (July 6, 2015). "Dragon Ball Super's intro will have you begging for its North American release". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2015.
 "Interview: The Past, Present and Future of Dragon Ball". Anime News Network. March 1, 2015. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved March 1, 2016.
 Barder, Ollie (August 12, 2015). "Japanese Fans Are Not Happy With The Animation In 'Dragon Ball Super'". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015.
 Ashcraft, Brian (August 10, 2015). "Dragon Ball Super Looks Super Crappy". Kotaku. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2015.
 "Dragon Ball Super Episode 39 Review: Hit vs Goku Fight Reveals A New Technique | Attack of the Fanboy". Attack of the Fanboy. April 17, 2016. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved March 17, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Episode 39 Review: Hit vs Goku Fight Reveals A New Technique | Attack of the Fanboy". April 17, 2016. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved September 28, 2016.
 Saris, Shawn (November 15, 2016). "Episode 66 Review IGN". IGN. Archived from the original on November 15, 2016. Retrieved January 5, 2017.
 "Dragon Ball Super Blu-Ray – Parts 5 & 6". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020.
 "Dragon Ball Super Episode 52 Review: Master and Pupil Reunited – Gohan and 'Future' Trunks". Den of Geek. February 25, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2022.
 "Dragon Ball Super Episode 73 Review: Gohan's Plight! The Preposterous Great Saiyaman Film Adaptation?!". Den of Geek. July 29, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2022.
 Saris, Shawn (October 10, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super "Episodes 109 and 110" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2018.
 Saris, Shawn (November 21, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super Episode 116: "The Sign of a Comeback! Ultra Instinct's Huge Explosion!!" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved January 4, 2018.
 Gibbs, Jay (September 3, 2017). "It's Time to Admit that DRAGON BALL SUPER is Terrible". ComicsVerse. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved May 3, 2018.
 Leach, Sam (May 14, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super Episode 90". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 17, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017.
 Leach, Sam (April 30, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super Episode 88". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 3, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018.
 Peters, Megan (January 10, 2017). "Dragon Ball Super Toonami Premiere Ratings Released". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved January 12, 2017.
 Peters, Megan (March 18, 2018). "Thousands of 'Dragon Ball Super' Fans Flocked to Worldwide Watch Parties for Episode 130". Anime. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved April 9, 2018.
 "'Dragon Ball Super' finale to be live-streamed by Mexican government". March 11, 2018. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2018.
 Muncy, Julie (January 17, 2019). "The Everlasting (and Still Growing) Appeal of 'Dragon Ball'". Wired. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2019.
 Ashcraft, Brian (March 19, 2019). "Massive Crowds Gather To Watch Dragon Ball Super Together". Kotaku. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2019.
 Fida, Wamig (January 18, 2018). "The Real Reason Why There Is No Blood And Gore In DBS". OtakuKart. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved December 10, 2018.
 "Lascivious Master Roshi Suspected Target in Latest BPO Published Complaint". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved January 21, 2019.
 "Crunchyroll Has Announced Their Third Annual Anime Awards". GeekTyrant. December 7, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2018.
 Coats, Cayla (January 11, 2019). "Meet the Nominees for the 2018 Anime Awards!". Crunchyroll. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2019.
 "My Hero Academia Sweeps Crunchyroll's Anime Awards". August 5, 2023. Archived from the original on September 22, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2019.
 "Winners of the 2019 Anime Awards—Updated Live!". Crunchyroll. February 16, 2019. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2019.
External links
Official Toei Animation website
Official English website
Official website at Adult Swim at the Wayback Machine (archived 2019-02-08)
Dragon Ball Super official manga website at Viz Media
Dragon Ball Super official manga website at Manga Plus
Dragon Ball Super (anime) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
Dragon Ball Super at IMDb
vte
Dragon Ball by Akira Toriyama
vte
Akira Toriyama
vte
V Jump series
vte
Toei Animation television series
Portals:
icon Anime and manga
flag Japan
icon 2010s
Categories: Manga series2015 manga2015 anime television series debutsDragon Ball animeAkira ToriyamaAnimated television series set on fictional planetsAnime and manga about time travelAnime series based on mangaCrunchyroll Anime Awards winnersCrunchyroll animeFuji Television original programmingInterquel television seriesJapanese time travel television seriesMartial arts anime and mangaJapanese martial arts television seriesSequel comicsShueisha franchisesShueisha mangaShōnen mangaTelevision series about talking animalsTime loop anime and mangaToei Animation televisionViz Media manga
This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 03:03 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Dragon Ball Super

37 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot

Production

Media

Reception

Legacy and controversies

See also
Notes
References
External links
Death Note

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
For other uses, see Death Note (disambiguation).
Death Note

First tankōbon volume cover, featuring Light Yagami (front) and Ryuk (back)
Genre	
Mystery[1]
Psychological thriller[2][3]
Supernatural thriller[1][4]
Manga
Written by	Tsugumi Ohba
Illustrated by	Takeshi Obata
Published by	Shueisha
English publisher	
AUS: Madman Entertainment
NA: Viz Media
Imprint	Jump Comics
Magazine	Weekly Shōnen Jump
Demographic	Shōnen
Original run	December 1, 2003 – May 15, 2006
Volumes	12 (List of volumes)
Further information
icon Anime and manga portal
Death Note (stylized in all caps) is a Japanese manga series written by Tsugumi Ohba and illustrated by Takeshi Obata. It was serialized in Shueisha's shōnen manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump from December 2003 to May 2006, with its chapters collected in 12 tankōbon volumes. The story follows Light Yagami, a genius high school student who discovers a mysterious notebook: the "Death Note", which belonged to the shinigami Ryuk, and grants the user the supernatural ability to kill anyone whose name is written in its pages. The series centers around Light's subsequent attempts to use the Death Note to carry out a worldwide massacre of individuals whom he deems immoral and to create a crime-free society, using the alias of a god-like vigilante named "Kira", and the subsequent efforts of an elite Japanese police task force, led by enigmatic detective L, to apprehend him.

A 37-episode anime television series adaptation, produced by Madhouse and directed by Tetsurō Araki, was broadcast on Nippon Television from October 2006 to June 2007. A light novel based on the series, written by Nisio Isin, was also released in 2006. Additionally, various video games have been published by Konami for the Nintendo DS. The series was adapted into three live-action films released in Japan in June, November 2006, and February 2008, and a television drama in 2015. A miniseries titled Death Note: New Generation and a fourth film were released in 2016. An American film adaptation was released exclusively on Netflix in August 2017, and a series is reportedly in the works. Two one-shot manga sequels, C-Kira and a-Kira, were published in 2008 and 2020, respectively; they were later collected in a single volume titled Death Note: Short Stories, alongside other standalone stories, in 2021. An online social deduction game, Death Note: Killer Within, was released by Bandai Namco Entertainment for the PlayStation 5, PlayStation 4, and Windows via Steam in 2024.

Death Note media, except for video games and soundtracks, is licensed and released in North America by Viz Media. The episodes from the anime first appeared in North America as downloadable from IGN before Viz Media licensed it. The series was aired on YTV's Bionix programming block in Canada and on Adult Swim in the United States with a DVD release following. The live-action films briefly played in certain North American theaters, in 2008, before receiving home video releases. By April 2015, the Death Note manga had over 30 million copies in circulation, making it one of the best-selling manga series.

Plot
Further information: List of Death Note characters
In Tokyo, a disaffected high school student named Light Yagami finds the "Death Note", a mysterious black notebook with rules that can end anyone's life in seconds as long as the writer knows both the target's true name and face. Light uses the notebook to kill high-profile criminals and is visited by Ryuk, a shinigami and the Death Note's original owner. Ryuk, invisible to anyone who has not touched the notebook, reveals that he dropped the notebook into the human world out of boredom and is amused by Light's actions.[5]

Global media suggest that a single mastermind is responsible for the mysterious murders and name them "Kira" (キラ, the Japanese transliteration of the word "killer"). Interpol requests the assistance of the enigmatic detective L to assist in their investigation. L tricks Light into revealing that he is in the Kanto region of Japan by manipulating him to kill a decoy. Light vows to kill L, whom he views as obstructing his plans. L deduces that Kira has inside knowledge of the Japanese police investigation, led by Light's father, Soichiro Yagami. L assigns a team of FBI agents to monitor the families of those connected with the investigation and designates Light as the prime suspect. Light graduates from high school to college. L recruits Light into the Kira Task Force.

Actress-model Misa Amane obtains a second Death Note from a shinigami named Rem and makes a deal for shinigami eyes, which reveal the names of anyone whose face she sees, at the cost of half her remaining lifespan. Seeking to have Light become her boyfriend, Misa uncovers Light's identity as the original Kira. Light uses her love for him to his advantage, intending to use Misa's shinigami eyes to discern L's true name. L deduces that Misa is likely the second Kira and detains her. Rem threatens to kill Light if he does not find a way to save Misa. Light arranges a scheme in which he and Misa temporarily lose their memories of the Death Note, and has Rem pass the Death Note to Kyosuke Higuchi of the Yotsuba Group.

With memories of the Death Note erased, Light joins the investigation and, together with L, deduces Higuchi's identity and arrests him. Light regains his memories and uses the Death Note to kill Higuchi, regaining possession of the book. After restoring Misa's memories, Light instructs her to begin killing as Kira, causing L to cast suspicion on Misa. Rem realizes Light's plan to have Misa sacrifice herself to kill L. After Rem kills L, she disintegrates and Light obtains her Death Note. The task force agrees to have Light operate as the new L. The investigation stalls but crime rates continue to drop.

Four years later, cults worshiping Kira have risen. L's potential successors are introduced: Near and Mello. Mello joins the mafia whilst Near joins forces with the US government. Mello kidnaps Director Takimura, who is killed by Light. Mello kidnaps Light's sister and exchanges her for the Death Note, using it to kill almost all of Near's team. A Shinigami named Sidoh goes to Earth to reclaim his notebook and ends up meeting and helping Mello. Light uses the notebook to find Mello's hideout, but Soichiro is killed in the mission. Mello and Near exchange information and Mello kidnaps Mogi and gives him to Near. Kira's supporters attack Near's group, but they escape. Shuichi Aizawa, one of the task force members, becomes suspicious of Light and meets with Near. As suspicion falls again on Misa, Light passes Misa's Death Note to Teru Mikami, a fervent Kira supporter, and appoints newscaster Kiyomi Takada as Kira's public spokesperson. Near has Mikami followed whilst Aizawa's suspicions are confirmed. Realizing that Takada is connected to Kira, Mello kidnaps her. Takada kills Mello but is killed by Light. Near arranges a meeting between Light and the current Kira Task Force members. Light tries to have Mikami kill Near as well as all the task force members, but Mikami's Death Note fails to work, having been replaced with a decoy. Near proves Light is Kira discovering Mikami had not written down Light's name. Light is wounded in a scuffle and begs Ryuk to write the names of everyone present. Ryuk instead writes down Light's name in his Death Note, as he had promised to do the day they met, and Light dies.

One year later, the world has returned to normal and the Kira Taskforce Members are conflicted over whether they made the right decision. Meanwhile, cults continue to worship Kira.

C-Kira (one-shot sequel)
Three years later, Near, now functioning as the new L, receives word that a new Kira has appeared. Hearing that the new Kira is randomly killing people, Near concludes that the new Kira is an attention-seeker and denounces the new Kira as "boring" and not worth catching. A shinigami named Midora approaches Ryuk and gives him an apple from the human realm, in a bet to see if a random human could become the new Kira, but Midora loses the bet when the human writes his own name in the Death Note after hearing Near's announcement. Ryuk tells Midora that no human would ever surpass Light as the new Kira.

a-Kira (one-shot sequel)
Another ten years later, Ryuk returns to Earth and gives the Death Note to Minoru Tanaka, the top-scoring student in Japan, hoping that he will follow in Light Yagami's footsteps. On explaining the rules to Minoru, Ryuk is surprised when he returns the notebook and tells him to return it and his memory of their encounter to him in two years' time. Two years later, on receiving the notebook back from Ryuk, Minoru reveals he has no plans to use it himself but rather he plans to auction it off to the governments of the world, with Ryuk's help sending his offer out as "a-Kira", having waited two years until he was old enough to have a bank account to allow his plan to work. Elsewhere, Near (as L) is revealed to be developing technology meant to track Shinigami, although it is not yet advanced enough to be useful. After selling the Death Note to U.S. president Donald Trump[6][7][8][b] for a sum that would ensure every Japanese citizen under the age of 60 would be financially set for life, Minoru relinquishes his ownership and memory of his plan to Ryuk, assuring his own anonymity, while Trump is left unable to use the Death Note after the King of Death creates a new rule disallowing the Death Note to be sold, and he secretly returns it to Ryuk. Minoru collapses to the ground in the bank after withdrawing his savings. It is revealed that Ryuk wrote his name in the Death Note next to Light's. He longs for a human who will use the notebook for a longer period of time.

Production
Development
The Death Note concept derived from a rather general concept involving shinigami and "specific rules".[10] Author Tsugumi Ohba wanted to create a suspense series because the genre had some suspense series available to the public. After the publication of the pilot chapter, the series was not expected to receive approval as a serialized comic. Learning that Death Note had received approval and that Takeshi Obata would create the artwork, Ohba said, they "couldn't even believe it".[11] Due to positive reactions, Death Note became a serialized manga series.[12]

"Thumbnails" incorporating dialogue, panel layout and basic drawings were created, reviewed by an editor and sent to Takeshi Obata, the illustrator, with the script finalized and the panel layout "mostly done". Obata then determined the expressions and "camera angles" and created the final artwork. Ohba concentrated on the tempo and the amount of dialogue, making the text as concise as possible. Ohba commented that "reading too much exposition" would be tiring and would negatively affect the atmosphere and "air of suspense". The illustrator had significant artistic licence to interpret basic descriptions, such as "abandoned building",[13] as well as the design of the Death Notes themselves.

When Ohba was deciding on the plot, they visualized the panels while relaxing on their bed, drinking tea, or walking around their house. Often the original draft was too long and needed to be refined to finalize the desired "tempo" and "flow". The writer remarked on their preference for reading the previous "two or four" chapters carefully to ensure consistency in the story.[10]

The typical weekly production schedule consisted of five days of creating and thinking and one day using a pencil to insert dialogue into rough drafts; after this point, the writer faxed any initial drafts to the editor. The illustrator's weekly production schedule involved one day with the thumbnails, layout, and pencils and one day with additional penciling and inking. Obata's assistants usually worked for four days and Obata spent one day to finish the artwork. Obata said that when he took a few extra days to color the pages, this "messed with the schedule". In contrast, the writer took three or four days to create a chapter on some occasions, while on others they took a month. Obata said that his schedule remained consistent except when he had to create color pages.[14]

Ohba and Obata rarely met in person during the creation of the serialized manga; instead, the two met with the editor. The first time they met in person was at an editorial party in January 2004. Obata said that, despite the intrigue, he did not ask his editor about Ohba's plot developments as he anticipated the new thumbnails every week.[11] The two did not discuss the final chapters with one another and continued talking only with the editor. Ohba said that when they asked the editor if Obata had "said anything" about the story and plot, the editor responded: "No, nothing".[13]

Ohba claims that the series ended more or less in the manner that they intended for it to end; they considered the idea of L defeating Light Yagami with Light dying but instead chose to use the "Yellow Box Warehouse" ending. According to Ohba, the details had been set "from the beginning".[12] The writer wanted an ongoing plot line instead of an episodic series because Death Note was serialized and its focus was intended to be on a cast with a series of events triggered by the Death Note.[15] 13: How to Read states that the humorous aspects of Death Note originated from Ohba's "enjoyment of humorous stories".[16]

When Ohba was asked, during an interview, whether the series was meant to be about enjoying the plot twists and psychological warfare, Ohba responded by saying that this concept was the reason why they were "very happy" to place the story in Weekly Shōnen Jump.[14]

Concepts
The notebooks
The core plot device of the story is the "Death Note" itself, a black notebook with instructions (known as "Rules of the Death Note") written on the inside. When used correctly, it allows anyone to commit a murder, knowing only the victim's name and face. According to the director of the live-action films, Shusuke Kaneko, "The idea of spirits living in words is an ancient Japanese concept.... In a way, it's a very Japanese story".[17]

Artist Takeshi Obata originally thought of the books as "Something you would automatically think was a Death Note". Deciding that this design would be cumbersome, he instead opted for a more accessible college notebook. Death Notes were originally conceived as changing based on time and location, resembling scrolls in ancient Japan, or the Old Testament in medieval Europe. However, this idea was never used.[18]

Themes
Writer Tsugumi Ohba had no particular themes in mind for Death Note. When pushed, he suggested: "Humans will all eventually die, so let's give it our all while we're alive".[19] In a 2012 paper, author Jolyon Baraka Thomas characterised Death Note as a psychological thriller released in the wake of the 1995 Tokyo subway sarin attack, saying that it examines the human tendency to express itself through "horrific" cults.[20]

Pilot chapter
The Death Note process began when Ohba brought thumbnails for two concept ideas to Shueisha; Ohba said that the Death Note pilot, one of the concepts, was "received well" by editors and attained positive reactions from readers.[12] Ohba described keeping the story of the pilot to one chapter as "very difficult", declaring that it took over a month to begin writing the chapter. He added that the story had to revive the killed characters with the Death Eraser and that he "didn't really care" for that plot device.[21]

Obata said that he wanted to draw the story after he heard of a "horror story featuring shinigami".[11] According to Obata, when he first received the rough draft created by Ohba, he "didn't really get it" at first, and he wanted to work on the project due to the presence of shinigami and because the work "was dark".[21] He also said he wondered about the progression of the plot as he read the thumbnails, and if Jump readers would enjoy reading the comic. Obata said that while there is little action and the main character "doesn't really drive the plot", he enjoyed the atmosphere of the story. He stated that he drew the pilot chapter so that it would appeal to himself.[21]

Ohba brought the rough draft of the pilot chapter to the editorial department. Obata came into the picture at a later point to create the artwork. They did not meet in person while creating the pilot chapter. Ohba said that the editor told him he did not need to meet with Obata to discuss the pilot; Ohba said "I think it worked out all right".[11]

Anime adaptation
Tetsurō Araki, the director, said that he wished to convey aspects that "made the series interesting" instead of simply "focusing on morals or the concept of justice". Toshiki Inoue, the series organizer, agreed with Araki and added that, in anime adaptations, there is a lot of importance in highlighting the aspects that are "interesting in the original". He concluded that Light's presence was "the most compelling" aspect; therefore the adaptation chronicles Light's "thoughts and actions as much as possible". Inoue noted that to best incorporate the manga's plot into the anime, he "tweak[ed] the chronology a bit" and incorporated flashbacks that appear after the openings of the episodes; he said this revealed the desired tensions. Araki said that, because in an anime the viewer cannot "turn back pages" in the manner that a manga reader can, the anime staff ensured that the show clarified details. Inoue added that the staff did not want to get involved with every single detail, so the staff selected elements to emphasize. Due to the complexity of the original manga, he described the process as "definitely delicate and a great challenge". Inoue admitted that he placed more instructions and notes in the script than usual. Araki added that because of the importance of otherwise trivial details, this commentary became crucial to the development of the series.[22]

Araki said that when he discovered the Death Note anime project, he "literally begged" to join the production team; when he joined he insisted that Inoue should write the scripts. Inoue added that, because he enjoyed reading the manga, he wished to use his effort.[22]

Media
Manga
See also: List of Death Note chapters
Death Note, written by Tsugumi Ohba and illustrated by Takeshi Obata, was serialized in Shueisha's shōnen manga magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump from December 1, 2003,[23][24] to May 15, 2006.[c][24] The series' 108 chapters were collected into twelve tankōbon volumes by Shueisha, released from April 2, 2004,[27] to July 4, 2006.[28] A one-shot chapter, titled "C-Kira" (Cキラ編, C-Kira-hen) ("Death Note: Special One-Shot"), was published in Weekly Shōnen Jump on February 9, 2008. Set two years after the manga's epilogue, it sees the introduction of a new Kira and the reactions of the main characters in response to the copycat's appearance.[29][30] Several Death Note yonkoma (four-panel comics) appeared in Akamaru Jump. The yonkoma was written to be humorous. The Akamaru Jump issues that printed the comics include 2004 Spring, 2004 Summer, 2005 Winter, and 2005 Spring. In addition Weekly Shōnen Jump Gag Special 2005 included some Death Note yonkoma in a Jump Heroes Super 4-Panel Competition.[21] Shueisha re-released the series in seven bunkoban volumes from March 18 to August 19, 2014.[31][32] On October 4, 2016, all 12 original manga volumes and the February 2008 one-shot were released in a single All-in-One Edition, consisting of 2,400 pages in a single book.[33][34]

In April 2005, Viz Media announced that they had licensed the series for English release in North America.[35] The twelve volumes were released from October 10, 2005, to July 3, 2007.[36][37] The manga was re-released in a six-volume omnibus edition, dubbed "Black Edition".[38][39] The volumes were released from December 28, 2010, to November 1, 2011.[40][41] The All-in-One Edition was released in English on September 6, 2017, resulting in the February 2008 one-shot being released in English for the first time.[42]

In addition, a guidebook for the manga was also released on October 13, 2006. It was named Death Note 13: How to Read and contained data relating to the series, including character profiles of almost every character that is named, creator interviews, behind the scenes info for the series and the pilot chapter that preceded Death Note. It also reprinted all of the yonkoma published in Akamaru Jump and the Weekly Shōnen Jump Gag Special 2005.[43][44] In North America, 13: How to Read was released on February 19, 2008.[45]

In the June 2019 issue of Shueisha's Jump Square it was announced that a new one-shot chapter of Death Note would be published. Part of the complete manuscript debuted at the "30th Work Anniversary Takeshi Obata Exhibition: Never Complete" event which ran in Tokyo from July 13 to August 12, 2019.[46] Titled "Death Note: Special One-Shot", the entire 87-page chapter was published in Jump Square on February 4, 2020, and on Viz Media's website.[47][48] A collected volume titled Death Note: Short Stories (DEATH NOTE短編集, Desu Nōto Tanpenshū), which includes the "C-Kira" one-shot chapter, the "Special One-Shot" (re-titled "a-Kira" (aキラ編, a-Kira-hen), the series' pilot chapter, the "L: The Wammy's House" and "L: One Day" one-shot chapters and the yonkoma, was released on February 4, 2021.[49][50][51] The volume was published in English by Viz Media on May 10, 2022.[52]

Light novels
A light novel adaptation of the series has been written by Nisio Isin, called Death Note Another Note: The Los Angeles BB Murder Cases. The novel was released by Shueisha on August 1, 2006.[53][54] It serves as a prequel to the manga series, with Mello narrating the story of L's first encounter with Naomi Misora during the Los Angeles "BB Serial Murder Case" mentioned in volume 2 of the manga. Besides Naomi's character, the novel focuses on how L works and one of the criminals L has to chase down. Insight was given into Watari's orphanage and how the whole system of geniuses such as L, Mello, Beyond Birthday, Matt and Near were put to work. Viz released the novel in English on February 19, 2008.[55] The film L: Change the World was also adapted into a light novel with the same name on December 25, 2007, by "M",[56] While the novel is similar to the film, there are many significant changes to the plot (for example, Near is not a Thai boy, but the same Near that appears in the manga). It also reveals more information about L and his past. Viz released it on October 20, 2009.[57]

Anime
Main article: Death Note (2006 TV series)
The Death Note anime, directed by Tetsurō Araki and animated by Madhouse, began airing on Nippon TV on October 4, 2006, and finished its run on June 27, 2007, totaling 37 episodes.[58] The series aired on the network "every Tuesday at 0:56", which is effectively Wednesday.[59] The series was co-produced by Madhouse, Nippon Television, Shueisha, D.N. Dream Partners and VAP.[60] In North America, the series was licensed by Viz for residents in the United States to use "Download-to-Own" and "Download-to-Rent" services while it was still airing in Japan. This move was seen as "significant because it marked the first time a well known Japanese anime property was made legally available in the United States for domestic audiences to download while the title was still airing on Japanese television".[61] The downloadable episodes contained the original Japanese audio track and English subtitles,[62] and were made available through IGN's Windows-only Direct2Drive service.[63] DVDs of the series have also been released,[62] containing both an English dubbed audio track, produced by Ocean Productions, and the original Japanese audio track with optional English subtitles.[64] Viz announced at Anime Expo 2007 that the first DVD was officially released on November 20, 2007, in both regular and special editions,[65] and also confirmed at San Diego Comic-Con in 2007 that the first 15,000 copies of each DVD contain collectible figures.[66]

Death Note was slated to make its North American television premiere in Canada, as part of YTV's Bionix programming block, on September 7, 2007.[67] However, the show was removed from the schedule at the last minute[68] and the Canadian premiere was pushed back to October 26, 2007, at 10:00 p.m. The series premiered in the U.S. on October 20, 2007, at 12:00 a.m. on Adult Swim[69] and ran until January 10, 2010, when its contract expired.[70] The last episode aired on YTV, July 4, 2008, and would later air on Adult Swim two days later. The show was removed from YTV's schedule on July 5, 2008, with its last airing being a rerun of the final episode at 1:30 a.m. ET. Soon after, Bionix became a 2-hour block on Saturday nights.[71] The show also streamed online free on Adult Swim Video, with a new episode available every Saturday afternoon, on the day of its broadcast premiere.[72] On July 26, 2017, Starz announced that they would be offering episodes of the series for their video on demand service starting on August 1 of that same year.[73]

A two-hour animated Death Note Relight: Visions of a God (DEATH NOTE リライト·幻視する神, Desu Nōto Riraito: Genshisuru kami) TV special aired on Nippon Television in Japan on August 31, 2007, at 8:00 p.m. It is a recap which takes place after the series end, where a shinigami approaches Ryuk in the shinigami realm in order to learn more about the human world. Instead, Ryuk tells him of all the events leading up to the last story arc, about Light Yagami and his rival L. Originally, this special was advertised as a retelling told from Ryuk's point of view, but it does not give a different point of view from what was originally told. However, it contains updated dialog, as well as a few new scenes.[74]

Nippon TV aired the Death Note: Relight: L's Successors (DEATH NOTE リライト2 Lを継ぐ者, Desu Nōto Riraito 2: L o Tsugu Mono) special on August 22, 2008. Like the first special, this new compilation summarized a part of the 2006–2007 anime television series. Specifically, it recounted the final half of the suspenseful supernatural story, including the investigators Near and Mello's confrontations with the vigilante Kira.[75] This version features more updates than the previous one, most notably omission of the mafia plot.

Soundtracks
Main article: Death Note original soundtracks
Several soundtracks for the series have been released. The music from the anime was composed by Yoshihisa Hirano and Hideki Taniuchi, while the CDs were also published by VAP. The first one was Death Note Original Soundtrack, which was released in Japan on December 21, 2006. It contains music from the series with the first opening and ending themes are sung by the Japanese band Nightmare in the TV size format.[76] Death Note Original Soundtrack II was first released in Japan on March 21, 2007. It features the new opening and closing themes by Maximum the Hormone in the TV size format.[77] The third CD, Death Note Original Soundtrack III was released on June 27, 2007. Tracks 1–21 were composed and arranged by Taniuchi, while tracks 22–28 were composed and arranged by Hirano. The album features one track sung by Aya Hirano, who was also the Japanese voice actress of Misa Amane in the anime series. Also appearing on this soundtrack is the ending theme Coda〜Death Note, which can be heard at the end of the final episode of the anime as the credits are shown.[78]

Several soundtracks have also been released for the live action films. Sound of Death Note is a soundtrack featuring music from the first Death Note film composed and arranged by Kenji Kawai. It was released on June 17, 2006, by VAP.[79] Sound of Death Note the Last name is the soundtrack from the second Death Note film, Death Note the Last name. It was released on November 2, 2006.[80] Death Note Tribute is a tribute album dedicated to the live action film Death Note. Published by BMG Japan on June 21, 2006, Japan, it contains 15 tracks performed by various artists, such as Shikao Suga, M-Flo, Buck-Tick, and Aya Matsuura. The soundtrack came with a cosplay Death Note notebook.[81] Another tribute album is The Songs for Death Note the movie〜the Last name Tribute dedicated to the second film. Published by Sony Music Entertainment Japan on December 20, 2006, it contains 14 tracks performed by various artists, such as Orange Range, Abingdon Boys School, High and Mighty Color, Doping Panda, and Galneryus.[82]

Live-action films
Main articles: Death Note (2006 film), Death Note 2: The Last Name, L: Change the World, Death Note: New Generation, Death Note: Light Up the New World, and Death Note (2017 film)
Death Note was adapted into a series of live-action films in 2006. The first two films were directed by Shusuke Kaneko and the third was directed by Hideo Nakata and produced by Nippon Television, CG production of all three films were done by Digital Frontier and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures Japan. The first film, simply titled Death Note, premiered in Japan on June 17, 2006, and topped the Japanese box office for two weeks, pushing The Da Vinci Code into second place.[83] The first film briefly played in certain North American theaters on May 20–21, 2008.[84] The film was broadcast in Canadian theaters for one night only on September 15, 2008. The DVD was released on September 16, 2008, one day after the Canadian showing.[85] The sequel, Death Note 2: The Last Name, premiered in Japan on November 3, 2006.[86] It was featured in U.S. theaters in October 2008.[87]

A spin-off from the films named L: Change the World was released in Japan on February 9, 2008. It is focused on the final 23 days of L's life, as he solves one final case involving a bio-terrorist group.[88] Two dubbed versions of the film were shown in the United States on April 29 and 30, 2009.[89] In August 2016, a three-part miniseries entitled Death Note: New Generation was announced as a part of the Death Note live-action film series and aired in September. It bridges the 10-year gap between the previous films and the then-upcoming 2016 film.[90][91] A fourth Japanese Death Note film was released in 2016[92] and featured a cyber-terrorism setting with the inclusion of six Death Notes brought into the human world.[93] An American adaptation was released on Netflix on August 25, 2017.[94] The film was directed by Adam Wingard and was written by Charles Parlapanides, Vlas Parlapanides, and Jeremy Slater. It starred Nat Wolff, Lakeith Stanfield, Margaret Qualley, Shea Whigham, Paul Nakauchi, Jason Liles, and Willem Dafoe. A sequel film is reportedly in the works.[95]

Live-action series
Main article: Death Note (2015 TV series)
In April 2015, it was announced that a live-action television series based on Death Note manga would begin airing from July 2015 on Nippon TV.[96] Masataka Kubota stars as Light Yagami and Kento Yamazaki as L in the series.[97]

In July 2022, it was announced that the Duffer Brothers recently founded Upside Down Pictures production company would be producing a new live-action series adaptation for Netflix.[98][99] In October 2022, it was announced that Halia Abdel-Meguid was brought on to write and executive produce the series.[100][101]

Video games
A Death Note video game developed and published by Konami for the Nintendo DS, titled Death Note: Kira Game (デスノート キラゲーム, Desu Nōto Kira Gēmu), was released on February 15, 2007.[102] Kira Game is a strategy game where the player takes on the role of Kira or L. These are just titles, as any character can be Kira or L. The player will attempt to deduce who their enemy is (Kira will try to uncover L's identity and vice versa). This will play out in three phases: investigation, where the player will discuss the case and clues with other characters; voting, where each member of the investigation team casts a vote on who they suspect is L or Kira based on the player's performance in the previous phase; L/Kira, where the player can either focus their investigation on one member to see if they are Kira (L part), or force a member off of the team (Kira part).[103] A sequel to the game, Death Note: Successors to L (デスノート Lを継ぐ者, Desu Nōto Eru o Tsugu Mono), was released in Japan on July 12, 2007. The storyline is based on the second part of the manga, featuring characters such as Mello and Near.[103]

A third game, L the Prologue to Death Note: Spiraling Trap (L the proLogue to DEATH NOTE -螺旋の罠-, L the proLogue to DEATH NOTE -Rasen no Wana-), was released for the Nintendo DS in Japan on February 7, 2008.[103][104] The player assumes the role of a rookie FBI agent who awakens in a strange hotel and attempts to escape with the help of L, who provides assistance via an in-game PDA. The story is set before the Kira investigation in the original series.[104] Several characters from Death Note appear in Jump Super Stars and Jump Ultimate Stars, a fighting game featuring multiple characters from Weekly Shōnen Jump titles. Light, Ryuk, and L appear in Jump Super Stars as support characters. Misa, Near, and Mello are added as support characters in Jump Ultimate Stars as well.[105][106] The 2019 video game Jump Force features Light and Ryuk as non-playable characters, playing a key role in the game's story mode.[107]

An online social deduction game, titled Death Note: Killer Within, was released by Bandai Namco Entertainment for the PlayStation 5, PlayStation 4, and Windows via Steam on November 5, 2024. In the game, up to ten players are split into two teams—Kira and his followers and L and the police investigation team. Kira's team aims to kill all its target with the Death Note and L's team must seize and dispose of the Death Note. Both teams try to uncover the identities of the opposing players. The players are represented by pawns, akin to those used by Near in the original series.[108]

Musical
Main article: Death Note: The Musical
In 2015, a musical adaptation of the manga called Death Note: The Musical ran in both Japan and South Korea. It was originally composed in English by Broadway composer Frank Wildhorn, with lyrics by Jack Murphy and book by Ivan Menchell.[109] An English production was announced in May 2023 to play at the London Palladium for two nights on August 21–22, 2023,[110] directed by Nick Winston starring Joaquin Pedro Valdes as Light, Dean John-Wilson as L and Frances Mayli McCann as Misa.[111] The original Japanese production, produced by Japanese talent agency HoriPro [ja], ran from 6 to April 29, 2015, and stars Kenji Urai and Hayato Kakizawa [ja] double-cast as Light Yagami, and Teppei Koike as L.[112] A Korean production of the same musical ran from June 11 to August 11, 2015, in South Korea, starring musical actor Hong Kwang-ho and JYJ member and musical actor Kim Junsu.[113][114]

Reception
Manga
By April 2015, the Death Note manga had over 30 million copies in circulation.[115] On ICv2's "Top 10 Shonen Properties Q2 2009", Death Note was the third best-selling manga property in North America.[116] The series ranked second on Takarajimasha's Kono Manga ga Sugoi! list of best manga of 2006 and 2007 for male readers.[117] It was nominated for the 38th Seiun Awards in the Best Comic category in 2007.[118] The manga received the Grand Prize of Best Manga and Best Screenplay at the Japan Expo Awards 2007.[119] The series won the 2008 Eagle Award for Favourite Manga as voted by UK fans.[120] According to a survey conducted in 2007 by the Ministry of culture of Japan, occupies the tenth place among the best manga of all time.[121] It also received several nominations such as Best Manga at the 2006 American Anime Awards,[122][123] the 2007 Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize,[124] an Official Selection at Angoulême International Comics Festival 2008,[125] and Obata was nominated for Best Penciller/Inker at the 2008 Eisner Awards.[126] In 2007, the first three volumes of Death Note were on the American Library Association's 2007 Great Graphic Novels for Teens Top Ten list.[127]

Douglas Wolk of Salon said that a rumor circulated stating that the creators intended to create Death Note to last half as long as its actual run and Ohba and Obata had been persuaded to lengthen the storyline when Death Note's popularity increased, noting that the rumor "makes sense, since about halfway through the series, there's a point that seems like a natural ending". In addition, he said that fans wrote "thousands" of Death Note fan fiction stories and posted them on the internet.[128] In 2006, Japanese fans pointed out the similarities between Death Note and the 1973 one-shot manga The Miraculous Notebook (不思議な手帖) by Shigeru Mizuki. Comipress reported that the only difference between the story and Death Note is that there are no shinigamis.[129]

Anime News Network writer Zac Bertschy called Death Note a "surprisingly gripping and original suspense tale that raises a handful of interesting questions about morality". He noted that the difference between the series and other manga from the same demographic was very big due to the murders the main character commits as well as how he hides his identity of Kira. Although Bertschy mentioned some manga readers will be surprised with the dark themes of Death Note, he praised the series for its "great art, great story, [and] compelling characters".[130] Briana Lawrence from the same website stated that what makes Death Note so interesting is that there is no villain, "instead it had two opposing sides that both believe in the same thing: justice". She felt that once vital characters fading into the background, the ending brings back what the fans loved about the first volume and the supporting cast are "given a chance to shine". She also mentioned that the epilogue made no mention of what happens with Misa Amane and how Near and Mello were still treated like parts of L.[131] Julie Rosato from Mania Entertainment found the story to be very entertaining, having liked Light's development in the story and L's introduction as well as how the latter starts suspecting the former's identity. Additionally, she praised the story as it is "building a climax" with each detail introduced in the first chapter, making the reader look forward to upcoming chapters.[132] Jolyon Baraka Thomas, in a Japanese Journal of Religious Studies article, describes the manga as having a "somber narrative" with a "dark cast". Obata's art is "[rendered] in stark strokes characterized---fittingly---by a complex interplay of light and shadow".[20]

Anime
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 100% of 14 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 8.5/10. The website's consensus reads: "Death Note is an exceptional anime that poses profound questions about justice and murder, all while delivering a supremely satisfying tale of tactical one-upmanship between a detective and killer."[133]

The anime was commended with Tom S. Pepirium of IGN saying that Death Note's "heavy serialized nature" is what "makes the show so engaging and discussion worthy".[134] Pepirium, saying that translating Death Note is "no small task", stated that Stephen Hedley created an English dub with "nothing clunky". He added that Karl Willems, director of the dub, assembled a "stunning voice cast of professionals" with a "solid tone minus some of the cheesy yelling and screaming of other dubs".[135] On the NPR show Fresh Air, John Powers said that Death Note is "at least as addictive as a show like Lost".[136] Hyper wrote:

Running over thirty-seven 20 minutes episodes, the anime sticks much closer to the manga so takes a far more languid approach to storytelling, better fleshing out the fantastic characters of Light and his nemesis, L. Light in particular is one of the most layered characters to appear in anime in a long time.[137]

Jacob Hope Chapman from Anime News Network praised Teru Mikami's role as bloody and flashy and even better than that of Near, Mello, and Misa.[138] The Daily Telegraph's Henry St. Leger wrote, "What starts as a moral fable about the corruption of power becomes a slow-burning game of cat-and-mouse as Light is chased down by the world's greatest detective. Some droning voice acting leadens what is otherwise a brilliantly terse noir."[139] Vulture's Maya Phillips wrote, "Beyond its deft twists and turns, Death Note also addresses questions about morality, justice, and capital punishment. All this, plus beautiful animation and well-written dialogue and plot, makes Death Note the cream of the animated crop."[140]

The Death Note anime was one of the series to win Best TV Anime at the 2007 Tokyo International Anime Fair.[141] In 2009, Death Note was listed as the 51st best animated show in IGN's Top 100 Animated Series.[142]

Light novels
A.E. Sparrow of IGN reviewed the novel Another Note and gave it a 9.5 out of 10. Sparrow said that the author understood "what made these characters click so well" and "captures everything that made the manga the compelling read that it is". Sparrow said that fans of Death Note who read Another Note will "find a welcome home" in Nisio Isin's work which "adds a few more fun layers" to the Death Note franchise.[143] The novelization of L: Change the World became the second top-selling light novel in Japan during 2008.[144]

Legacy and controversies
The series release outside Japan has inspired other works, as well as individuals making their own mock "Death Notes", including one that was associated with a real-life murder. According to Wired magazine, Death Note "[turned] Japan's most-popular print medium into an internationally controversial topic that has parents wondering whether they should prohibit their kids from reading manga entirely". Live-action director Shusuke Kaneko commented in response, "If preventing them from seeing this movie is going to make kids better, then why not prevent them from watching all bad news?".[17]

In regards to the 2019 The Twilight Zone episode "The Comedian", Rosie Knight of The Hollywood Reporter stated that Samir's story appears to take a large influence from Death Note.[145] The Simpsons has parodied Death Note in both comic books and animation with the 2008 comic book story "Murder, He Wrote" in The Simpsons Treehouse of Horror #14,[146][147] where Bart receives the notebook from the Ryuk-ified ghost of Krusty the Clown, and the "Death Tome" segment of the 2022 television episode "Treehouse of Horror XXXIII", with Lisa receiving the titular book.[148]

Bans and attempted bans
Early in 2005, school officials in Shenyang, the capital of Liaoning (People's Republic of China), banned Death Note.[149] The immediate cause was that students had been altering notebooks to resemble Death Notes and then writing the names of acquaintances, enemies, and teachers in the books.[150][151] The ban was designed to protect the "physical and mental health"[152] of students from horror material that "misleads innocent children and distorts their mind and spirit".[153] Jonathan Clements has suggested that the Chinese authorities acted partly against "superstition", but also against illegal, pirate publishers of Death Note.[154] The ban has been extended to other Chinese cities including Beijing,[155][156] Shanghai and Lanzhou in Gansu Province.[157] Legally published Chinese-language versions of Death Note are published in Hong Kong.[154] On June 12, 2015, the Chinese Ministry of Culture listed Death Note among 38 anime and manga titles banned in China.[158]

In 2007, the education bureau in Pingtung County, Taiwan asked teachers to pay attention to any negative influence on elementary school students reading the manga.[159] In May 2010, the Albuquerque Public Schools in New Mexico held a hearing to ban the Death Note manga from their district's schools; it was unanimously voted down.[160] After volumes of Death Note were found at the February 2013 suicide of a 15-year-old girl in Yekaterinburg, Russia, a local parents' group began campaigning to regulate all media based on the series, saying that it had an adverse effect on the minds of children.[161] In March 2014, investigators concluded that the manga did not cause the girl to commit suicide.[162]

Imitations of the series

Typical design of a Death Note
There have been various imitations around the world of the premise of Death Note. At least one instance was linked to a crime - on September 28, 2007, two notes written with Latin characters stating "Watashi wa Kira dess" [sic], a mis-transliteration of "I am Kira" (私はキラです, Watashi wa Kira desu),[163] were found near the partial remains of a Caucasian male in Belgium. The case has been called the "Mangamoord" (Dutch for Manga Murder) in Belgian media.[164] It was not until 2010 that four people were arrested in connection to the murder.[165] A senior at the Franklin Military Academy in Richmond, Virginia, United States was suspended in 2007 after being caught possessing a replica "Death Note" notebook with the names of fellow students. The school's principal wrote a letter to the student's parents linking to an unofficial website where visitors can write names and circumstances of death for people they want to die.[166]

In South Carolina in March 2008, school officials seized a "Death Note" notebook from a Hartsville Middle School student. District officials linked the notebook to the anime/manga. The notebook listed seven students' names. The school planned a disciplinary hearing and contacted the seven students' parents.[167] In Gadsden, Alabama in April 2008, two sixth-grade boys were arrested for possession of a "Death Note" that listed names of several staff members and fellow students. According to Etowah County Sheriff's Department Sgt. Lanny Handy, the notebook was discovered the previous afternoon by a staffer. The students were suspended from the county's schools, pending a juvenile court hearing. The students, their parents, and school officials had met with Handy and a junior probation officer.[168] In Gig Harbor, Washington, one middle school student was expelled and three were suspended on May 14, 2008, for having 50 names in their own "Death Note" book, including President George W. Bush.[169]

It was reported in September 2009, that a Year Eight boy in Sydney, Australia, created a "Death Note" that along with names contained a "battle plan" detailing where bombs could be placed inside his school.[170] In December 2009, two students at an elementary school in Oklahoma were disciplined for a "Death Note" with the names and descriptions of deaths of two girls that had angered them.[171] A Michigan middle school student was suspended indefinitely in March 2010 for a "Death Note".[172] In May 2010, a middle school student in Avonworth School District in Pennsylvania was suspended for a "Death Note" with names of fellow students and pop singer Justin Bieber.[160] In February 2015, a fifth-grade student of an elementary school near Pittsburgh was suspended for owning a "Death Note" and writing other students' names in it.[173]

See also
Now: Zero, a short story by J. G. Ballard with a similar premise to Death Note
"Obits", a short story by Stephen King with a similar premise to Death Note
Notes
 In the United Kingdom through Crunchyroll UK and Ireland (formerly known as Manga Entertainment) and in Australia through Crunchyroll Store Australia (formerly known as Madman Anime).
 The text does not call him Trump, though Hannah Collins of Comic Book Resources stated "the uncanny likeness to the divisive political figure is hard to miss."[9]
 It finished in the magazine's 24th issue of 2006 (cover date May 29),[25] released on May 15 of that same year.[26]
References
 "The Official Website for Death Note". Viz Media. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2017.
 "Viz Media Announces Fall DVD Release of Death Note™ Anime Series" (Press release). Viz Media. June 29, 2007. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Retrieved January 2, 2020 – via Anime News Network. it is as much a psychological thriller as it is a crime drama.
 Ellingwood, Holly (November 9, 2007). "Death Note Vol. 1 Original and Uncut (Advance Review)". Active Anime. Archived from the original on March 25, 2016.
 Luther, Katherine. "Death Note: Series Profile". About.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2007. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Death Note is a supernatural thriller series that zeros in on a very delicate question: is all life worth saving or are there some that we'd be better off without?
 Oba, Tsugumi (2005). Death Note Vol. 1 - Boredom. Obata, Takeshi, 1969-, Rolf, Pookie, trl. (Shonen Jump advanced graphic novel ed.). San Francisco: Viz Media. p. 18. ISBN 1-4215-0168-6. OCLC 62099999.
 Elfring, Mat (April 20, 2022). "Death Note: Short Stories Brings One-Shots To Print, Including That Infamous Trump Story". Gamespot. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved February 23, 2025.
 Colbert, Isaiah (November 5, 2024). "That Time Donald Trump Got the Death Note". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on January 10, 2025. Retrieved February 23, 2025.
 Collins, Hannah (February 7, 2020). "What Death Note's New One-Shot Has to Say About Donald Trump". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on September 1, 2021. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Collins, Hannah (February 7, 2020). "Death Note: Every Cameo in the New One Shot". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 1, 2024. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 173. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 58. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 180. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. pp. 60–61. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 194. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 "Death Note Manga Spawns Movie, Crime Wave". Wired. May 19, 2008. Archived from the original on August 9, 2013. Retrieved August 24, 2013.
 Ohba, Tsugumi; Obata, Takeshi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 149. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 69. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Thomas, Jolyon Baraka. "Horrific "Cults" and Comic Religion". Japanese Journal of Religious Studies. 39 (1): 127–151.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. p. 215. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 Kimlinger, Carl (November 2007). "Passion and dreams". Newtype USA. 6 (11): 50–51.
 週刊少年ジャンプ 2004年Vol.1. Pop Web Jump (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on December 21, 2003. Retrieved July 14, 2018.
 『DEATH NOTE』12年ぶりの完全新作読切が掲載決定！ 表紙用描き下ろしイラストが公開. Famitsu (in Japanese). January 24, 2020. Archived from the original on January 23, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 週刊少年ジャンプ 2006年24. Media Arts Database (in Japanese). Agency for Cultural Affairs. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023.
 週刊少年ジャンプ 2006年Vol.24. Pop Web Jump (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on June 23, 2006. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 DEATH NOTE 1 (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 DEATH NOTE 12 (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 Loo, Egan (February 3, 2008). "Death Note Manga to Return with One-Shot Story in Japan". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
 週刊少年ジャンプ 2008年 Vol. 11. Pop Web Jump (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on February 11, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2024.
 DEATH NOTE 1 (集英社文庫) (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 DEATH NOTE 7 (集英社文庫) (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 Stimson, Eric (October 2, 2016). "All 2,400 Pages of Death Note Manga Compiled in One Really Big Volume". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 25, 2017. Retrieved September 25, 2017.
 DEATH NOTE 完全収録版 (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 Loo, Egan (April 20, 2005). "Death Note Licensed by Viz". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 27, 2005. Retrieved November 19, 2006.
 "Death Note, Vol. 1". Viz Media. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2018.
 "Death Note, Vol. 12". Viz Media. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 "Viz Hosts Ultimo/Shaman King's Takei at Comic-Con Int'l (Updated)". Anime News Network. July 24, 2010. Archived from the original on September 24, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2011. Publisher to reprint Death Note in Black Edition omnibus
 Beveridge, Chris (July 27, 2010). "Death Note Black On Tap". Archived from the original on November 30, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2011. Starting in February of 2011, the new Black Edition versions of the series will contain two volumes of the series in on volume with slightly oversized trade paperback sizes that will have black trim
 "Death Note Black Edition, Vol. 1". Viz Media. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 "Death Note Black Edition, Vol. 6". Viz Media. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 "Viz Media Announces Release of the Definitive Death Note All-in-one Edition" (Press release). Viz Media. September 7, 2017. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved September 25, 2017.
 Ohba, Tsugumi (2008). Death Note 13: How to Read. Viz Media. pp. 215–223. ISBN 978-1-4215-1888-6.
 "Death Note 13: How to Read" (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on December 5, 2010. Retrieved June 13, 2008.
 "Death Note 13: How to Read". Viz Media. Archived from the original on December 26, 2007. Retrieved June 13, 2008.
 Sherman, Jennifer (May 1, 2019). "Takeshi Obata Draws New Death Note 1-Shot Manga". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved May 1, 2019.
 Hodgkins, Crystalyn (January 3, 2020). "Jump SQ. Magazine Publishes Death Note Manga's New 1-Shot Chapter in February". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020.
 Lee, Julia (February 3, 2020). "Death Note's Ryuk is back to assist a new Kira in a surprising new one-shot". Polygon. Archived from the original on February 3, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2020.
 Davidson, Danica (January 28, 2021). "New Death Note Book Coming Out in Japan". Otaku USA. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 「DEATH NOTE」の読切集めた短編集、「プラチナエンド」最終巻と同時発売. Comic Natalie (in Japanese). Natasha, Inc. February 4, 2021. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 DEATH NOTE短編集 (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021.
 "Death Note Short Stories". Viz Media. Archived from the original on September 22, 2024. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
 Mays, Jonathan (May 9, 2006). "Death Note, XXXHOLiC Novels in the Works". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on November 13, 2006. Retrieved December 7, 2006.
 "西尾維新 × Death Note" (in Japanese). Shueisha. Archived from the original on December 5, 2006. Retrieved December 21, 2006.
 "Death Note Another Note: The Los Angeles BB Murder Cases (Novel)". Viz Media. Archived from the original on December 26, 2007. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
 "L change the world" (in Japanese). Shūeisha. Archived from the original on December 23, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2009.
 M (October 20, 2009). L change the world. Viz Media. ISBN 978-1421532257.
 "Nippon Television Network Program Catalogue: Animation" (PDF). Nippon Television. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 6, 2006. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 "Official Death Note Anime Website" (in Japanese). Nippon Television. Archived from the original on November 9, 2006. Retrieved November 6, 2006.
 "Official Death Note staff listing" (in Japanese). Nippon Television. Archived from the original on March 21, 2007. Retrieved March 28, 2007.
 "Viz Media Secures Landmark Agreement To Make Death Note Anime Series Available For Download". Mania Entertainment. January 10, 2007. Archived from the original on December 5, 2008. Retrieved January 11, 2007.
 Mays, Jonathan (January 13, 2007). "Death Note Release Won't be Limited to Downloads". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 15, 2007. Retrieved January 13, 2007.
 Loo, Egan (May 3, 2007). "Viz to Offer Death Note Downloads via Direct2Drive". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 9, 2007. Retrieved May 4, 2007.
 Dong, Bamboo (February 24, 2007). "New York ComicCon 2007 – Viz Media – Anime". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on February 27, 2007. Retrieved February 24, 2007.
 "Viz Media Announces Fall DVD Release of Death Note Anime Series" (Press release). Viz Media. June 29, 2007. Archived from the original on July 1, 2007. Retrieved July 2, 2007 – via Anime News Network.
 Santos, Carlo (July 26, 2007). "Viz Media – Comic-Con International 2007". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 24, 2007. Retrieved July 27, 2007.
 "YTV, Discovery Kids and Treehouse Ring in September with Exciting New Series and Returning Favourites" (Press release). Corus Entertainment. July 23, 2007. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved July 10, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (September 4, 2007). "Death Note Removed from Canada's YTV Schedule". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 16, 2007. Retrieved September 6, 2007.
 Loo, Egan (September 20, 2007). "Death Note Confirmed to Air on Adult Swim October 20". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 23, 2008. Retrieved January 16, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (January 11, 2010). "Adult Swim Loses Blood+ & Death Note, Hints at 3 New Anime". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010. Retrieved January 21, 2010.
 "Press room – Press kids". Corus Entertainment – Press_Corporate. Archived from the original on March 12, 2008. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
 Loo, Egan (October 19, 2007). "Death Note's English Dub Premieres on Web, Television". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 29, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
 "Starz app August 2017 Movies and TV Titles Announced". ComingSoon.net. July 26, 2017. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018.
 Loo, Egan (July 12, 2007). "Death Note TV Special to be Three-Hour Director's Cut". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 14, 2007. Retrieved July 13, 2007.
 Loo, Egan (July 25, 2008). "Second Death Note Special to Air on August 22 in Japan". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved June 7, 2009.
 "Death Note オリジナル・サウンドトラック" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
 "Death Note オリジナル・サウンドトラックII" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on December 3, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2009.
 "Death Note オリジナル・サウンドトラックIII" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
 "Sound of Death Note" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
 "Sound of Death Note the Last Name" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2009.
 "Death Note Tribute" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
 "The Songs for Death Note the movie〜the Last name Tribute" (in Japanese). Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2009.
 Loo, Egan (June 27, 2006). "Death Note Tops Box Office Again". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved December 18, 2006.
 Loo, Egan (April 14, 2008). "1st Death Note Film to Run in 300+ U.S. Theaters in May". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 15, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2008.
 "Death Note Live-Action!! Trailer". Viz Media. April 14, 2007. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2007.
 Mays, Jonathan (September 28, 2006). "Death Note 2 Trailer". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 14, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2009.
 Loo, Egan (August 25, 2008). "2nd Death Note Film to Run in U.S. Theaters in October". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 2, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2009.
 Loo, Egan (July 30, 2007). "Death Note's L Spinoff to Open on February 9 in Japan". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on March 18, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2009.
 Loo, Egan (March 6, 2009). "Death Note's L Spinoff Film in U.S. Theaters in April". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 9, 2009. Retrieved June 27, 2009.
 Pineda, Rafael Antonio (August 9, 2016). "2016 Death Note Film Gets 3-Episode Prequel on Hulu Japan". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on October 1, 2024. Retrieved August 13, 2016.
 映画『デスノート』 続編が10年ぶりに作られた理由 (in Japanese). The Nikkei. October 31, 2016. Archived from the original on December 25, 2022. Retrieved November 12, 2024.
 Loo, Egan (September 13, 2015). "Live-Action Death Note Films Get 2016 Sequel by Gantz Helmer Sato". Archived from the original on September 14, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2015.
 Hodgkins, Crystalyn (February 4, 2016). "New Live-Action Death Note Film Stars Sōsuke Ikematsu, Masahiro Higashide, Masaki Suda". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 Opam, Kwame (March 22, 2017). "Watch the first trailer for Netflix's live-action Death Note movie". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2017.
 Ressler, Karen (August 22, 2018). "THR: Sequel to Netflix's Death Note Film in the Works". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2020.
 『デスノート』初の連ドラ化 日テレ7月期より放送開始 (in Japanese). Oricon. April 20, 2015. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015.
 Komatsu, Mikikazu (May 25, 2015). "Character Visuals for "Death Note" TV Drama Adaptation Revealed". Crunchyroll. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015.
 Mateo, Alex (July 6, 2022). "Death Note Gets New Netflix Live-Action Series by Stranger Things Creators". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 6, 2022). "Duffer Brothers Launch Netflix Shingle Upside Down Pictures; 'Stranger Things' Spinoff & Stephen Daldry-Helmed Stage Play Coming Along With Manga 'Death Note' & Stephen King/Peter Straub 'The Talisman' Series". Deadline. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved June 25, 2023.
 Hailu, Selome (October 20, 2022). "Netflix's 'Death Note' Adaptation from Duffer Brothers Taps Halia Abdel-Meguid to Write and Executive Produce". Variety. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2022.
 Andreeva, Nellie (October 20, 2022). "'Death Note': Halia Abdel-Meguid To Write & EP Series Adaptation Of Manga For Netflix & Duffer Bros' Upside Down Pictures". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2022.
 "Death Note: Kira Game for DS". GameSpot. Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Retrieved December 17, 2007.
 "Official Konami Website for Death Note" (in Japanese). Konami. Archived from the original on February 2, 2007. Retrieved February 3, 2007.
 Loo, Egan (December 17, 2007). "Promo Video for Death Note's L Prequel Game Streamed (Updated)". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on December 19, 2007. Retrieved December 17, 2007.
 "Death Note - キャラクター紹介" (in Japanese). Nintendo. Archived from the original on August 17, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2014.
 "Jump Ultimate Star – Death Note" (in Japanese). Nintendo. Archived from the original on July 5, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2014.
 "E3 2018: Jump Force's Death Note Characters Aren't Playable, But Involved For Story". GameSpot. June 14, 2018. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 17, 2018.
 Mateo, Alex (October 30, 2024). "Death Note Series Gets New Online Social Deduction Game for PS5, PS4, PC on November 5". Anime News Network. Retrieved November 1, 2024.
 "Frank Wildhorn Musical Death Note Has NYC Reading With Andy Kelso, Robert Cuccioli and Adrienne Warren Prior to Japanese Premiere". Playbill. April 17, 2014. Archived from the original on August 18, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015.
 Gans, Andrew (May 24, 2023). ""Frank Wildhorn's Death Note: The Musical to Play 2 Concerts at London Palladium"". Playbill. Archived from the original on July 17, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023.
 Wood, Alex (June 1, 2023). "Death Note musical announces lead casting for the West End". WhatsOnStage. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023.
 "Death Note: The Musical Official English Website". HoriPro Inc. April 1, 2015. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015.
 "JYJ's Junsu Cast in Musical Adaptation of "Death Note"". Soompi. April 5, 2015. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2015.
 "′Death Note′ The Musical Unveils JYJ′s Kim Junsu and More in Korean Cast". Mwave. April 6, 2015. Archived from the original on April 9, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2015.
 DEATH NOTE ： 日テレで今夏連ドラ化決定 ニアも登場. Mainichi Shimbun Digital. April 20, 2015. Archived from the original on April 22, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2015.
 "'ICv2 Insider's Guide' #67: Top 10 Shonen". ICv2. July 30, 2009. Archived from the original on August 3, 2009. Retrieved August 19, 2009.
 【公式発表!!】『このマンガがすごい！』歴代ランキング作品を一挙大公開!!. Kono Manga ga Sugoi! (in Japanese). Takarajimasha. December 1, 2016. Archived from the original on December 7, 2016. Retrieved March 21, 2022.
 2007年星雲賞 (in Japanese). Nihon SF Taikai. Archived from the original on April 6, 2007. Retrieved March 21, 2022.
 "Japan Expo - Manga Awards - Les résultats". Manga-News (in French). July 10, 2007. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2022.
 Loo, Egan (May 14, 2008). "UK Fans Give Eagle Award to Death Note Manga". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 "The Top 50 Manga Series". Japan Probe. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012.
 "Finalists for the American Anime Awards". ICv2. February 8, 2007. Archived from the original on July 7, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2009.
 "American Anime Award Winners". ICv2. February 26, 2007. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved February 13, 2008.
 "11th Annual Tezuka Cultural Prize Winners Announced". Anime News Network. December 27, 2007. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 Koulikov, Mikhail (January 22, 2008). "Manga Nominated for Awards at Angouleme Festival". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 Loo, Egan (April 14, 2008). "Manga Listed Among Eisner Award Nominees for 2008". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 23, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 "2007 Great Graphic Novels for Teens Top Ten". American Library Association. Archived from the original on April 15, 2009. Retrieved June 28, 2009.
 Wolk, Douglas (July 26, 2007). "Death strip". Salon. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 10, 2015.
 "The Origin of Death Note?". Comipress.com. January 8, 2007. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 Bertschy, Zac (September 29, 2005). "Death Note GN 1". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 7, 2009. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
 Lawrence, Briana (August 5, 2007). "Death Note GN 12". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
 Rosato, Julie (November 3, 2005). "Death Note Vol. #02". Mania Entertainment. Archived from the original on November 30, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2009.
 "Death Note: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved November 4, 2021.
 Pepirium, Tom S. (November 19, 2007). "Death Note: "Tactics" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on November 21, 2007. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 Pepirium, Tom S. (February 27, 2008). "Death Note: "Ally" Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 2, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 Powers, John (April 28, 2008). "Killer Penmanship in 'Death Note'". NPR. Archived from the original on May 26, 2008. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 "Death Note: Volume 1". Hyper (173). Next Media: 79. March 2008. ISSN 1320-7458.
 Chapman, Jacob Hope (January 30, 2010). "Death Note Relight 2". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 19, 2014. Retrieved November 29, 2014.
 Leger, Henry St (May 10, 2016). "The 5 best anime series to stream online". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on August 24, 2024. Retrieved February 12, 2025.
 Phillips, Maya (October 10, 2017). "The 10 Best Anime Shows to Watch on Netflix". Vulture. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2025.
 Miller, Evan (March 19, 2007). "Results of 6th Annual Tokyo Anime Awards Announced". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2016.
 "51. Death Note". IGN. January 23, 2009. Archived from the original on March 16, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2009.
 Sparrow, A.E. (April 8, 2008). "Death Note – Another Note: The Los Angeles BB Murder Cases Review". IGN. Archived from the original on February 11, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (January 4, 2009). "2008's Top-Selling Light Novels in Japan (Updated)". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 29, 2009. Retrieved August 19, 2009.
 Knight, Rosie (April 1, 2019). "'The Twilight Zone' Takes on Classic Episode, Lust for Fame in CBS All Access Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 9, 2021. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 "Chat Live with Eisner Award Winner Nina Matsumoto Tomorrow on Suvudu.com" (Press release). Suvudu. November 23, 2009. Archived from the original on October 31, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022 – via Anime News Network.
 Loo, Egan (April 7, 2009). "Manga Nominated for 2009 Eisner Awards". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved October 31, 2022.
 "The Simpsons' Death Note Parody Was Animated By the Original Anime Studio". IGN. October 26, 2022. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022.
 "Chinese city bans Death Note" (in Chinese). Xihuanet. January 11, 2005. Archived from the original on December 25, 2008. Retrieved September 4, 2008.
 Macdonald, Christopher (February 6, 2005). "Death Note Stirs Controversy in China". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on September 15, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008.
 "Death Note in China – Success or Disaster?". ComiPress. March 26, 2007. Archived from the original on November 21, 2010. Retrieved August 27, 2008.
 "Beijing bans scary stories to protect young". Reuters. May 15, 2007. Archived from the original on May 17, 2007. Retrieved May 15, 2007.
 Weifeng, Liu (May 26, 2007). "'Death Note' days numbered". China Daily. Archived from the original on May 28, 2007. Retrieved May 27, 2007.
 Clements, Jonathan (August 2007). "Manga Pulse". NEO Magazine. No. 35. p. 19.
 Jie, Xiao (May 15, 2007). "Beijing publisher to ignore Beijing's ban of its horror story". Xinhuanet. Archived from the original on July 7, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008.
 MacDonald, Heidi (May 15, 2007). "Death Note banned in Beijing". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on June 17, 2007. Retrieved August 28, 2008.
 "Chinese Students Fight Back at Death Note Ban". ComiPress. June 5, 2007. Archived from the original on December 14, 2010. Retrieved June 15, 2008.
 "China bans 38 anime & manga titles including Attack on Titan". Special Broadcasting Service. June 12, 2015. Archived from the original on August 31, 2018. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 "Officials ask teachers to monitor 'Death Note' fans". Taipei Times. October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on October 29, 2018.
 Loo, Egan (May 10, 2010). "Death Note Ban in Albuquerque High Schools Fails Vote". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 "Parents in Russia request ban on 'Death Note'". Japan Today. April 29, 2013. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 ГОРБУНОВ, Андрей (March 3, 2014). "Следователи решили, что "Тетради смерти" не доводили уральскую школьницу до самоубийства". Ural.kp.ru -. Archived from the original on September 18, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 "Forest: le tueur aux mangas". La Dernière Heure. October 1, 2007. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved January 4, 2010.
 Loo, Egan (November 27, 2007). "Police Reaches Dead End in Belgian 'Manga Murder' Case". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 Loo, Egan (September 20, 2010). "4 Arrested for 2007 Belgian 'Manga Murder' Case". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 Loo, Egan (November 22, 2007). "Virginian Teen Suspended over Names in 'Death Note'". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (March 2, 2008). "South Carolina Student Removed over "Death Note" List". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on June 8, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (April 4, 2008). "2 Alabama 6th-Grade Boys Arrested for Death Note Book". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2008.
 Loo, Egan (May 24, 2008). "4 Washington Middle Schoolers Disciplined over "Death Note"". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on May 26, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2008.
 "Dark clouds of mental illness trouble young children". The Daily Telegraph. September 29, 2009. Archived from the original on September 28, 2016. Retrieved February 20, 2023.
 "Thief rips front door off station". Oklahoma City Friday. December 2009. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 Loo, Egan (March 26, 2010). "Michigan Middle School Boy Suspended Over 'Death Note'". Anime News Network. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved August 4, 2014.
 "Police Investigate Pennsylvania Boy Over 'Death Note'". Anime News Network. February 7, 2015. Archived from the original on February 19, 2015. Retrieved February 28, 2015.
External links
Death Note
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Media from Commons
Quotations from Wikiquote
Data from Wikidata
Official website Edit this at Wikidata (in Japanese)
Death Note official website at Viz Media
Death Note official manga website at Manga Plus
Madman Entertainment's Death Note website
Death Note (manga) at Anime News Network's encyclopedia
vte
Death Note by Tsugumi Ohba and Takeshi Obata
Links to related articles
Portals:
icon Anime and manga
flag Japan
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Manga series2003 manga2006 anime television series debutsAnime television filmsDeath Note2007 Japanese novels2007 anime films2007 films2008 anime films2008 films2020 mangaAnime and manga controversiesAnime series based on mangaCensored television seriesComics about deathComics about serial killersAnime and manga about crimeFiction about rivalryFilms directed by Tetsurō ArakiFilms with screenplays by Toshiki InoueMadhouse (company)Madman Entertainment animeMadman Entertainment mangaManga adapted into filmsMass murder in fictionMystery anime and mangaNippon Television original programmingOccult detective anime and mangaPsychological thriller anime and mangaShinigami in anime and mangaShōnen mangaShueisha mangaSupernatural thriller anime and mangaTelevision censorship in ChinaTelevision series about fictional serial killersViz Media animeViz Media mangaWorks banned in ChinaWorks banned in Russia
This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 18:30 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Death Note

82 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Pre-production
Filming
Post-production
Music
Marketing
Release
Reception

Box office
Critical response
Accolades
Notes
References
External links
Thunderbolts*

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Extended-protected article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Thunderbolts (film)" redirects here. For other similiarly titled films, see Thunderbolt (disambiguation) § Films.
Thunderbolts*
Members of the Thunderbolts standing next to each other.
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Jake Schreier
Screenplay by	
Eric Pearson
Joanna Calo
Story by	Eric Pearson
Based on	Marvel Comics
Produced by	Kevin Feige
Starring	
Florence Pugh
Sebastian Stan
Wyatt Russell
Olga Kurylenko
Lewis Pullman
Geraldine Viswanathan
Chris Bauer
Wendell Pierce
David Harbour
Hannah John-Kamen
Julia Louis-Dreyfus
Cinematography	Andrew Droz Palermo
Edited by	
Angela Catanzaro
Harry Yoon
Music by	Son Lux
Production
company	
Marvel Studios
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Release dates	
April 22, 2025 (Cineworld Leicester Square)
May 2, 2025 (United States)
Running time	126 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$180 million[2]
Box office	$280.4 million[3]
Thunderbolts* [a] is a 2025 American superhero film based on Marvel Comics featuring the team Thunderbolts. Produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, it is the 36th film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). The film was directed by Jake Schreier from a screenplay by Eric Pearson and Joanna Calo, and stars an ensemble cast featuring Florence Pugh, Sebastian Stan, Wyatt Russell, Olga Kurylenko, Lewis Pullman, Geraldine Viswanathan, Chris Bauer, Wendell Pierce, David Harbour, Hannah John-Kamen, and Julia Louis-Dreyfus. In the film, a group of antiheroes are caught in a deadly trap and forced to work together on a dangerous mission.

Marvel Studios first teased the formation of a Thunderbolts team within the MCU in 2021. The film was revealed to be in development in June 2022, when Schreier and Pearson were attached. The main cast was revealed in September, with additional casting through early 2023. Lee Sung Jin joined to rewrite the script by March 2023, one of several creatives who returned to work with Schreier from the Netflix series Beef (2023–present). Production was delayed due to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes, causing some cast changes in early 2024. Calo joined by then for further rewrites. Filming took place from February to June 2024 at Trilith Studios and Atlanta Metro Studios in Atlanta, Georgia, and also on location in Utah and Kuala Lumpur.

Thunderbolts* premiered on April 22, 2025, at the Cineworld Leicester Square in London, England, and was released in the United States on May 2, as the final film of Phase Five of the MCU. The film's ending reveals that the Thunderbolts team is rebranded as the "New Avengers", with the end credits revealing the asterisk in the film's title stands for The New Avengers; following the film's opening weekend, Marvel Studios began marketing it with that title. Thunderbolts* received positive reviews from critics, and has grossed $280 million, becoming the sixth highest-grossing film of 2025.

Plot
In Malaysia, Yelena Belova destroys a laboratory on behalf of CIA director Valentina Allegra de Fontaine to conceal her involvement with the O.X.E. Group's "Sentry" superhuman project. As de Fontaine faces imminent impeachment for her work with O.X.E. Group, she separately dispatches Yelena, John Walker, Ava Starr, and Taskmaster to a covert O.X.E. facility under the pretense of killing thieves. In the ensuing confrontation, Ava kills Taskmaster and a mysterious man named Bob is released from a suspended animation pod in the room. After realizing that they were sent by de Fontaine to be incinerated along with any evidence of her misconduct, they manage to work together and escape from the trap.

De Fontaine learns that the group has survived, including Bob, who was presumed dead during the Sentry trials. When she arrives at the site, Bob creates a diversion by drawing enemy fire, allowing Yelena, Walker, and Ava to escape, only to sustain no injuries despite being shot. Bob then uncontrollably ascends into the air before passing out and crash-landing back at the compound, where he is captured and transported to the former Avengers Tower in Manhattan, now renamed the "Watchtower". De Fontaine intends to introduce Bob to the press as a super-powered protector akin to the Avengers, hoping the PR stunt will avert her impeachment. Meanwhile, Alexei Shostakov, who had overheard details of de Fontaine's plot while working as a freelance chauffeur, rescues Yelena, Walker, and Ava. Alexei refers to the group as the "Thunderbolts", in reference to a soccer team Yelena played on in her childhood.

De Fontaine's agents pursue the Thunderbolts before they are ultimately apprehended by Bucky Barnes, who intends to have them testify in the impeachment proceedings. Upon learning that Bob was a subject of one of de Fontaine's top-secret experiments, Barnes joins the group to head to New York to infiltrate the Watchtower. The Thunderbolts discover that de Fontaine has convinced Bob to join her side as a new superhero she plans to market as a replacement for the Avengers called the Sentry. After easily overpowering the team and forcing them to retreat, Sentry develops a god-like delusion of superiority, turning on de Fontaine. However, her assistant, Mel, incapacitates him with a failsafe kill switch. This triggers the emergence of the Void, Bob's destructive alter ego and the embodiment of his depression and insecurities created as a result of the procedure and his fractured psyche, who begins engulfing New York City in supernatural darkness, trapping its citizens in pocket dimensions based on their worst memories.

Realizing the only way to stop the Void is from within, Yelena enters the darkness to reach Bob's consciousness. There, she faces her haunted past as a Black Widow and finds Bob hiding in a recreation of his childhood bedroom, where his father abused him. The other Thunderbolts join them, and together they travel back to the memory of Bob's initial experimentation in Malaysia, where he volunteered for the procedure, hoping to improve himself after becoming an aimless drug addict. The Thunderbolts confront the Void, but are swiftly overpowered. As the struggle threatens to fully consume Bob, the team intervenes, affirming their belief in him. Their solidarity empowers Bob to regain control, overcoming the Void as light and normality return to the city.

With the threat neutralized, the Thunderbolts prepare to apprehend de Fontaine. However, she manipulates public perception by staging a press conference in which she introduces them to the public as the New Avengers. The Thunderbolts go along with this, but Yelena threatens de Fontaine if she betrays them again. In a post-credits scene, the New Avengers and Bob discuss Captain America's intent to sue the team for trademark infringement and an ongoing problem in outer space,[b] when they receive a distress signal from an extradimensional spacecraft with a large "4" emblem.[c]

Cast

Florence Pugh (left) and David Harbour co-star in the film, which further explores the relationship between their characters, Yelena Belova and Alexei Shostakov
Florence Pugh as Yelena Belova:
A member of the Thunderbolts who was trained in the Red Room as a Black Widow assassin.[8] Pugh said the character has been affected by the traumatic events of recent Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) projects, including the death of her adoptive sister Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow in the film Avengers: Endgame (2019).[9] Co-writer Eric Pearson explained that while the loss of Romanoff was addressed, there was not more looking to the past to "push forward" to give Belova a "big leadership role moving forward".[10] Pugh was shocked by the reveal that the Thunderbolts would be known as the New Avengers, and believed Belova being a part of that team was "probably keeping her alive", giving her purpose with a family unit that relied on her and "allowed her to feel loved again".[11] Violet McGraw reprises her role as a young Yelena from the film Black Widow (2021).[12]
Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier:
An enhanced super soldier with a cybernetic arm who is the de facto leader of the Thunderbolts.[8][13] Presumed killed in action during World War II, he reemerged in the present day as a brainwashed assassin before his programming was removed,[8] and has since been elected as a member of the United States House of Representatives.[14] Pearson said Barnes was originally written to be "kind of a [political] lobbyist" who helped politicians "propagandize", making it seem as though the character had fallen from grace until it is revealed that he was doing that to investigate de Fontaine. After Pearson finished his work on the film, Feige suggested that Barnes should be a congressman instead.[15] Stan compared Barnes to Jack Nicholson's character Randle McMurphy in the film One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975), saying they were both coming into a chaotic and degenerate group whose members need to be united.[16]
Wyatt Russell as John Walker / U.S. Agent:
An enhanced super soldier and member of the Thunderbolts. He is a former decorated Captain of the U.S. Army Rangers who was chosen by the U.S. government to become Steve Rogers's successor as Captain America before receiving an other than honorable discharge in the Disney+ miniseries The Falcon and the Winter Soldier (2021).[8]
Olga Kurylenko as Antonia Dreykov / Taskmaster:
An assassin with photographic reflexes that allow her to mimic opponents' fighting styles. She was formerly controlled by her father, Dreykov, to complete missions for the Red Room before being freed by Romanoff in Black Widow.[8]
Lewis Pullman as Bob Reynolds / Sentry / Void:
A superpowered individual suffering from amnesia who is believed to be stronger than all of the Avengers combined.[17][18] As the Void, a version of Sentry completely shrouded in shadows, he is invincible, spreads darkness, and can turn people into shadows.[18] Bob's mental health arc was based on the experiences of director Jake Schreier's friend.[19]
Geraldine Viswanathan as Mel:
Valentina Allegra de Fontaine's assistant.[20] Mel was in high school when the Avengers first assembled in the film The Avengers (2012). Viswanathan related to Mel's inner struggle with her moral compass, specifically "her optimism in entering the workforce, how your idealism can get challenged, and how it can be more difficult than you think to be a force of good in the world."[21]
Chris Bauer as Holt: A security officer for O.X.E. Group[20]
Wendell Pierce as Gary: A Congressman[22][23]
David Harbour as Alexei Shostakov / Red Guardian:
A member of the Thunderbolts who is the Russian super soldier counterpart to Captain America and a father-figure to Belova.[8] Harbour said the film further explores the complex relationship between Shostakov and Belova that was introduced in Black Widow. He noted that Belova cannot stand Shostakov, but she needs someone to help her feel complete, and Shostakov fills that role.[24]
Hannah John-Kamen as Ava Starr / Ghost:
A member of the Thunderbolts who can phase through objects.[8] John-Kamen said the film shows a different side of the character following her introduction in the film Ant-Man and the Wasp (2018), with Ghost no longer in a constant state of molecular disequilibrium and able to control her powers with calmness and decisiveness.[25]
Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Valentina Allegra de Fontaine:
A contessa and the director of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),[8][26] who brings together the members of the Thunderbolts.[27] The film establishes de Fontaine as the one who bought Avengers Tower, now referred to as "Watchtower", from Tony Stark in the film Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017).[28] Louis-Dreyfus described de Fontaine as someone who is "after power, control, and just generally she wants to kick ass in the Marvel Universe".[29] She added that the loss of power was her greatest weakness, saying, "She doesn't realize, number one, she doesn't have it, and number two, she doesn't necessarily need it. But for her, the loss of power is a devastating notion and unacceptable." Louis-Dreyfus felt it was a "very happy surprise" exploring de Fontaine's backstory in the film, during an encounter with the Void, where she relives witnessing her father's death, hence giving an understanding to where she came from. She felt de Fontaine was an "open wound" during that moment and had no control over it.[30]
Additionally, Gabrielle Byndloss reprises her role as Walker's wife Olivia from The Falcon and the Winter Soldier.[31]

Production
Development
During the production of the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) film Guardians of the Galaxy (2014), director James Gunn expressed interest in making a film based on the Marvel Comics team Thunderbolts,[32] a group of "anti-heroes and super-criminals".[33] Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige said this was a possibility based on the success of Guardians of the Galaxy.[32] By May 2021, Gunn was no longer interested in the idea after directing the DC Extended Universe (DCEU) film The Suicide Squad (2021), because that team from DC Comics is based on a similar concept to the Thunderbolts.[34] In June 2018, Hannah John-Kamen expressed enthusiasm for reprising her role as Ava Starr / Ghost from the MCU film Ant-Man and the Wasp (2018) in a potential Thunderbolts film, considering the comics version of Ghost is a member of the team.[33]

Speculation that a Thunderbolts team would be introduced to the MCU began in mid-2019 following the announcement that Daniel Brühl would appear as Helmut Zemo in the Disney+ series The Falcon and the Winter Soldier (2021), reprising his role from the MCU film Captain America: Civil War (2016).[35][36] That series introduced Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Valentina Allegra de Fontaine and shows her recruiting Wyatt Russell's John Walker / U.S. Agent. De Fontaine is also shown to be working with Florence Pugh's Yelena Belova in the post-credits scene of the MCU film Black Widow (2021). Commentators speculated that she is recruiting a team of villains or antiheroes like the Thunderbolts,[36][37] and some felt that team could appear in The Falcon and the Winter Soldier. Executive producer Nate Moore said the Thunderbolts were never considered for the project because they would "cloud the story" and take away from other aspects of the series. Head writer Malcolm Spellman said there was "a lot of chatter" around the team's potential introduction to the MCU and added, "I don't know if fans are crazy or not".[38]


Concept art released at the D23 Expo in September 2022 featuring the main cast in costume: (L to R) Julia Louis-Dreyfus as Valentina Allegra de Fontaine, Hannah John-Kamen as Ghost, David Harbour as Red Guardian, Florence Pugh as Yelena Belova, Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes, Wyatt Russell as U.S. Agent, and Olga Kurylenko as Taskmaster
Following his work on Black Widow, writer Eric Pearson brought the idea of a Thunderbolts film to Marvel Studios, realizing that Pugh had the potential to headline the film, given that Belova was "a natural leader". He was drawn to the story potential of Belova leading the Thunderbolts to go up against de Fontaine.[10] By centering the story on Belova, Pearson decided to include her father Alexei Shostakov / Red Guardian on the team, with Pearson also including Ghost because he had wanted to write the character.[15] Bucky Barnes was also added to the team after a few drafts.[39] The roster for the team eventually became Belova, Shostakov, Ghost, Barnes, Walker, and Antonia Dreykov / Taskmaster, with the character Robert "Bob" Reynolds / Sentry added shortly after; this roster stayed consistent through subsequent drafts.[19] To choose the team members, the creatives had looked through the roster of MCU characters to find "not just bad guys who could be good but characters that exist more on that morally grey plane or who were potentially destined for something else but then something went awry".[40] Pearson likened Belova to Michael Corleone and Barnes to Tom Hagen, characters from the novel The Godfather (1969).[10] In some of the initial drafts, Pearson had included Bill Foster / Goliath to continue his relationship with Ghost from Ant-Man and the Wasp, before joining the team by the end of the film. He was ultimately removed from the film, in part because Foster "didn't have the same background trauma that these other characters had, which was the unifying theme".[15][39]

By June 2022, Jake Schreier was attached to direct Thunderbolts,[41][42] from a screenplay by Pearson, with Feige producing. Schreier was hired after a presentation that "blew away" Marvel Studios executives. At that time, the studio had been in contact with actors to discuss their availability to reprise their roles for the film.[41] Schreier had considered including Man-Thing as a member of the team while pitching for the film,[40] who Pearson called "an unpredictable creature" explaining that they could not find a way to have his inclusion make sense for the story in part because the character was drawing visual and narrative attention away from Bob.[39] Another core concept that stayed consistent from the early drafts was the members being sent to kill each other, which Schreier believed provided a "neat twist" for audiences expecting Marvel Studios' version of the Suicide Squad;[11] Pearson also believed it was important for Thunderbolts not to "rehash" the story beats of that team – an authority figure forcing criminals to work together – since audiences would have been familiar with that from both Suicide Squad (2016) and The Suicide Squad.[39][43] Thus it did not make sense for the film to include Zemo or Thaddeus Ross, the leaders who had formed the team in the comics,[43] despite Schreier wanting to try to incorporate Zemo.[39] Pearson said the two characters' inclusion was discussed if it made sense narratively, as it would have honored the comics, but would not have featured them if it was for fan service. Zemo was included in an early post-credits scene idea where he would have been seen in prison "pulling the strings" similar to Keyser Söze, the antagonist in the film The Usual Suspects (1995), but this was quickly moved on from.[43]

The film was officially announced in July at San Diego Comic-Con (SDCC), with a release date of July 26, 2024. It was set to be the last film in Phase Five of the MCU.[44] Scarlett Johansson, who portrayed Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow in the MCU from 2010 to 2021, is credited as an executive producer.[45]

Pre-production
In September 2022, Justin Kroll of Deadline Hollywood described the film as a spin-off for Belova because she was expected to lead the antihero team, with Pugh and Russell believed to be reprising their roles, along with the inclusion of Brühl.[46] At the D23 Expo later that month, Pugh, Russell, John-Kamen, and Louis-Dreyfus were confirmed to star, alongside Sebastian Stan as Barnes, David Harbour as Red Guardian, and Olga Kurylenko as Taskmaster, all reprising their roles from previous MCU projects.[8] Pugh was set to be paid eight figures for Thunderbolts and another MCU film.[47] Prior to the cast announcement for the team, commentators had also suggested it could have included characters such as Abomination or Clint Barton.[41][36][37][48] Schreier compared the character dynamics to those in the films Reservoir Dogs (1992), Ronin (1998), and Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol (2011), which are all about a "mis-matched team forced to work together". He also pointed to a less-likely inspiration in the film Toy Story 3 (2010), saying the Thunderbolts members are all facing obsolescence like the Toy Story characters are in that film.[49] Harbour said the film would be unique in the MCU, describing the main cast as "a bunch of misfits and outcasts and losers and people who don't really live up to the super in superhero".[50] Pugh said the joy of uniting these characters was that they "don't play well together",[29] while Russell expressed confidence that the film would be interesting, fun, and not a "straightforward" Marvel film.[51] Journalist Jeff Sneider reported that Pearson's script focused too much on the characters returning from Black Widow, which he also wrote, and Marvel Studios was looking for the other characters to have a more equitable role so it would feel like an ensemble film.[52] Schreier did not believe the film was a Black Widow sequel but rather "a sampling of people from different parts" of the MCU, acknowledging the writers pulled from all of their histories, including Belova and Shostakov's relationship that was established in Black Widow.[53] One of Pearson's drafts started the film with a scene of Belova confronting de Fontaine about sending her to kill Barton, furthering the storyline that was established in the post-credits scene of Black Widow and continued in the Disney+ series Hawkeye (2021); Pearson said their confrontation helped emphasize de Fontaine's manipulation but ultimately was not relevant to the larger story being told.[10]

Picture of director Jake Schreier at the Deauville American Film Festival in 2012
Several crew members returned to work on Thunderbolts* with director Jake Schreier from the television series Beef, and explored mental health similar to that series
Ayo Edebiri joined the cast in January 2023 as de Fontaine's assistant Mel,[54][20][55] when Louis-Dreyfus said filming would begin that June.[56] In February, Steven Yeun was cast as Sentry with the potential to continue in future MCU films.[57][58][19] Yeun worked with Schreier on the Netflix series Beef (2023–present), and the director had the actor in mind when adding the character.[59] The next month, Beef creator Lee Sung Jin revealed that he was rewriting the script at Schreier's request and said there were "a lot of themes and exciting things" that drew him to the project. He worked closely with Schreier on the script and noted that, unlike Beef, Thunderbolts was Schreier's project and had different writing needs than the series, given the film's large scope and scale.[60] With the team largely consistent, Schreier worked in subsequent drafts to "go deeper" with the characters "on the margins" such as Mel and Congressman Gary and "[tying] their arcs together into something that would feel resonant".[19]

At the start of May 2023, filming was delayed due to the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike and was planned to resume after the strike concluded.[61] In June, the release date was pushed back to December 20, 2024,[62] and the Utah Film Commission announced that Thunderbolts would film in Emery County and Grand County, Utah, spending over $4.5 million in the state. Chapek said the "grounded, globe-trotting film" would use several practical filming locations and the Utah locations were chosen because they felt "untouched by the larger world".[63] Sanja Milkovic Hays was the costume designer after working on the MCU films Captain Marvel (2019) and Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021).[64] When the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike ended in November, the release date was pushed back again, this time to July 25, 2025.[65] Upon returning from the strike, Schreier and the creatives were able to reexamine the script, and determined that there was no sense of "tension and unpredictability" and the film felt "bloodless" when there should be the tension of not knowing who would survive given who these characters are. To solve this, they decided to rework Taskmaster's involvement in the film, killing the character "early and dry" in the film to have her death "resonate" and inform the fates of the other characters throughout the rest of the film. Having the death occur later in the film was also discussed, but Schreier said the sadness from it would "hang over" the rest of the film and distract from the intended storyline of forming a strong bond between Belova and Bob.[66]: 0:55–3:55 [67] In Pearson's original draft, Taskmaster survived until the end and had a sub-plot where she bonded with Ghost, as well as a recurring joke where she kept forgetting she had made friends with the other characters and was still trying to assassinate Walker.[68] Pearson understood why the decision was made to kill Taskmaster,[10] also believing the memory loss assassination joke drifted too close to Bob's arc as he also was dealing with memory loss.[68] Additionally, his post-credit scene featuring Kang the Conqueror was abandoned because Marvel Studios had decided to move away from that storyline.[43]

Following the strike-caused production delays, filming was slated to begin around March or April 2024.[69][70] Yeun exited in January 2024 due to a scheduling issue caused by the delayed production,[71][72] but expressed interest in working on a future MCU film.[72] It was unclear if Marvel would recast or rethink Yeun's role,[73] but at the end of the month Lewis Pullman was revealed to be the studios' top choice to replace Yeun as Sentry,[74][75][19] and his casting was soon confirmed.[55] Geraldine Viswanathan was cast to replace Edebiri as Mel after she exited due to the delays.[55][20] In February, the release date was moved forward to May 2, 2025, swapping places with the MCU film The Fantastic Four: First Steps.[76] By the end of the month, Joanna Calo had joined to serve as the writer during production and was rewriting the script.[77][19] For the film's final writing credits, Pearson was credited for the story and received a screenplay credit alongside Calo, while additional off-screen literary material was attributed to Lee.[78]

The script explores mental health, specifically loneliness and depression, particularly with Bob / Sentry.[19] Pearson always envisioned ending the film with the emotional moment of giving someone a hug rather than fighting them.[10] Before Sentry was added to the film, Walker was intended to be the main antagonist, with de Fontaine manipulating him into believing his super soldier serum was wearing off and giving him pills as a solution, making him into a "time bomb" that made him more unlikable and "the monster".[79][10] Pearson said this version "didn't ever totally work",[10] and Walker's actions felt too similar to the plot line of Thaddeus Ross becoming the Red Hulk in the MCU film Captain America: Brave New World (2025);[15] Pearson had considered Red Hulk for the film's villain early in the process, which Marvel Studios declined because of their intended plans for Brave New World.[39] Looking for a new antagonist that would not easily be beatable in a fight, Pearson remembered reading the Sentry miniseries years prior and felt Sentry and his alter ego the Void would work for "heroic ambition and self-esteem versus depression and self-loathing and loneliness and isolation";[10] he called Sentry "the entire journey for our heroes rolled into one entity" and his inclusion helped make the story cohesive.[79][10] Pearson was glad he was able to incorporate many elements of the character's comics backstory to fit into the MCU.[79] Paul Jenkins, co-creator of Sentry, discussed the character with the creatives, with Schreier calling Sentry and the work Jenkins did with the character "a parable for mental health".[80] Schreier explained that Lee felt mental health discussion was "not niche anymore" and it allowed them to "tell a story about that internality and still have a lot of comedy and action for something that feels big and universal".[19]

The Thunderbolts* team believed the film was a good opportunity to further explore ideas they had started to explore in Beef on a larger scale. Executive producer Brian Chapek came up with the idea that, to defeat Sentry, the Thunderbolts would have to enter the Void, which manifested memories of their greatest shame, dubbed "shame rooms". Lee worked closely with production designer Grace Yun, who also served that role on Beef, to create the initial specifics of each room.[80] Pearson had originally envisioned them as "ethereal and dreamy" but believed making them mazes akin to those seen in the film Being John Malkovich (1999) helped with visualizing the concept and made them feel "more unsettling".[10] Calo further enhanced the shame rooms, suggesting that when Belova enters to Void to help Bob that she return to her initial room seen earlier in the film. Schreier explained that this made a "callback of the idea that the greatest shame of all was thinking that you could be something bigger than yourself, that [Bob's] aspirations towards heroism are actually what brings everything down and that you need to learn to be ok with who you are without that". Shame rooms for Belova, Walker, and de Fontaine are seen, with rooms for the other characters conceived for the finale of the film for the team to escape through. However, Calo felt strongly that to journey to the heart of the Void, there needed to be a "Big Bad moment" beforehand, and the team should journey through Bob's shame rooms. The other shame rooms included: Shostakov being thrown in the gulag; Ghost growing up in an orphanage with no one wanting to be around her; and multiple different ones for Bucky that were "a little less than the expected idea", including a "shameful moment" in the Boy Scouts.[80]

Schreier had suggested during his pitch meeting that one of the film's posters or trailers should use an asterisk in the title to imply they needed to "come up with something better"; Feige, Marvel Studios co-president Louis D'Esposito, and the marketing team loved this idea and decided to fully embrace it for the title and marketing campaign;[66]: 4:26–5:15 [11] with the film formally retitled to Thunderbolts* by March 2024.[81][82] This allowed the creatives to realize that having the asterisk could lead to the reveal of a new title for the film once it was released,[66]: 4:26–5:15  which was subsequently done, changing the title to The New Avengers after the ending reveals the Thunderbolts to be the New Avengers.[4][7] Schreier said the ending was always going to have the Thunderbolts revealed as the New Avengers team, and the rest of the film became about "building the right story that lived up to that".[83] Pearson explained that Feige suggesting de Fontaine should introduce the Thunderbolts to the public as the Avengers; additional discussions were had on what this meant, such as if the "n" in "new" should be upper or lowercase, and what the implications of each decision would mean.[10] Thunderbolts* included "little hints" throughout so the ending did not come as a total surprise – such as the Battle of New York gala, Avengers Tower becoming the Watchtower, and Mel explaining how she was in high school when the Avengers first formed. Additionally, the credits and the post-credit sequences acknowledge that the New Avengers is "not necessarily the most comfortable or perfect fit" for these characters.[11] The original Thunderbolts name was derived from Belova's youth soccer team.[10]

Filming
Picture of the Merdeka 118 skyscraper in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in 2024
Star Florence Pugh jumped off of the Merdeka 118 skyscraper for the film's opening sequence
Filming was originally scheduled to begin in mid-June 2023 and last for six months.[61][56][84] It was initially not expected to be impacted by the writers' strike, with Marvel Studios reportedly planning to shoot what they could during principal photography and make any necessary writing adjustments during already scheduled reshoots.[85] Filming was ultimately delayed by the writers' strike and subsequent SAG-AFTRA strike.[61][65] The original filming schedule overlapped with Stan's work on the film The Apprentice (2024), for which he gained weight to portray Donald Trump. He had begun the physical transformation needed to portray Barnes when the strikes began and he had to reverse course.[86] Harbour planned to shoot the film concurrently with his scenes as Jim Hopper for the fifth season of Stranger Things (2025), also in Atlanta;[87] that production was also delayed by the strikes.[88]

Principal photography began by February 26, 2024,[89] at Trilith Studios and Atlanta Metro Studios in Atlanta, Georgia,[90][91] under the working title Oops All Berries, which is a reference to a variation of the cereal Cap'n Crunch that only has berry-flavored pieces.[63][91] Andrew Droz Palermo was the cinematographer,[92][19] having previously worked on the Marvel Studios series Moon Knight (2022).[93] He replaced Steve Yedlin who was originally intended to work on the film.[94][95] The film was shot for IMAX.[96] Filming occurred in Emery County and Grand County, Utah, from May 29 to June 12, 2024.[97] Louis-Dreyfus completed her scenes by early June,[98][99] and said Marvel Studios was trying to "go back to their roots" with a focus on the characters' humanity, practical stunt sequences, and avoiding visual effects where possible.[100] Filming also took place at the Medan Pasar square and Merdeka 118 skyscraper in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.[101][102] Pugh was insistent on filming the scene where Belova jumps off the top of Merdeka 118 without the use of stunt doubles. Marvel Studios was initially reluctant to allow Pugh to perform the stunt for insurance reasons, but after continually pushing the matter, including to Feige, she was allowed to perform the jump.[103] For Belova's trip through the shame rooms to save Bob, Palermo using a "handheld, hand-made aesthetic" similar to indie films such as Being John Malkovich, Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004), and those produced by A24 such as Everything Everywhere All at Once (2022). Feige championed doing as many of the effects practically and in camera as possible and Schreier noted the creatives liked the idea of doing a "practical rendition of what getting stuck in a thought loop or a shame room would be".[80] Filming concluded the week of June 19.[104]

Post-production
In September 2024, Chris Bauer and Wendell Pierce were revealed to have been cast in the film,[105] with Bauer playing Holt and Pierce playing Congressman Gary.[20][23] In early December, additional photography took place in Atlanta,[106] including to shoot the "Meth Chicken" shame room sequence from Bob's memories.[19] Harry Yoon and Angela Catanzaro edited the film; Yoon previously worked on the MCU film Shang-Chi and the Legend of the Ten Rings (2021) and with Schreier on Beef.[19] Jake Morrison is the visual effects supervisor, with visual effects provided by Industrial Light & Magic, Framestore, Digital Domain, Rising Sun Pictures, Raynault VFX, Base FX, Crafty Apes, and Mammal Studios.[107]

Thunderbolts* includes a post-credits scene set 14 months after the end of the film where the New Avengers, discussing a problem in outer space, are notified of an extradimensional spacecraft entering Earth-616, which is revealed to be the Fantastic Four's.[7][6] Schreier said this scene was filmed approximately a month before the film's release, on the Avengers: Doomsday (2026) set by that film's directors, the Russo brothers, and was intended for that film; Schreier was on set when the post-credits scene was filmed.[83][6][80] Schreier helped conceive the scene while noting the characters were being given over to a "whole new world and new scope" to function in, and enjoyed seeing them "directed in another context and on a different level of scope" than had been done for this film.[80] Pearson believed Calo had written the post-credits scene.[10] It originally included a sequence that was cut where Barnes and Walker had a "Who's on First?"-style exchange about the ship having the number four on it. Stan called the bit "genius" and was sad it had been cut, with Russell saying the exchange became "a Leslie Nielsen sketch".[108]

Music
Main article: Thunderbolts* (soundtrack)
The band Son Lux began recording the score for Thunderbolts* at Abbey Road Studios in London in the first week of February 2025, after member Ryan Lott previously scored Schreier's film Paper Towns (2015).[109] A soundtrack album featuring their music was released by Hollywood Records and Marvel Music on April 30, 2025.[110]

Marketing
After filming had begun in March 2024, Pugh and Marvel Studios released a set video in which she showcased her new Black Widow costume and an updated logo for the film with Schreier. The new logo styled the title as "Thunderbolts* ".[111][112] Kristen Lopez at TheWrap felt viewers would "start deconstructing the brief images she's shown immediately",[111] while Sabina Graves of Gizmodo felt the video was delightful and a fun tease for a scene featuring Belova. She highlighted Pugh's short hair and her joking with Schreier that they "really shouldn't be showing any of this".[112] Collider's Chris McPherson also discussed Pugh's costume, calling it "very military [and] quite tactical", and noted her teal eyeliner.[113] Several commentators questioned why there was an asterisk in the updated logo.[81] The next month, Feige confirmed that Thunderbolts* was the official title and said the use of the asterisk would be explained following the film's release,[82] which led to continued speculation as to its meaning.[114][115] One theory suggested the team would not be called the Thunderbolts in the film, but rather a variation of the Avengers name such as the Dark Avengers or New Avengers.[116][117] Another suggestion stated there was another Thunderbolts team in the MCU with characters more closely aligned to the rosters from the comics.[116]

External image
image icon The film's Wheaties-inspired poster at IMP Awards
A behind-the-scenes look was shown at CineEurope in June 2024,[104] while the first footage from the film was shown at SDCC the next month, presented by Schreier and the cast. Harbour dressed as Red Guardian for the panel.[118][119] Following online leaks of the SDCC footage, Marvel released an official look at the Thunderbolts team within their video celebrating the company's 85th anniversary in August.[120] A teaser trailer for the film was released in a month later,[45] featuring the song "Where Is My Mind?" by the Pixies.[121] Tom Power at TechRadar said the teaser was a longer and higher quality version of the previously leaked footage, and felt the film was "looking very good". He highlighted the characters' struggles with identity as well as the action and tone of the teaser.[122] Writing for The A.V. Club, Mary Kate Carr noted the various mysteries surrounding the film—including the asterisk in its title—and said the teaser "valiantly" refused to give up any secrets or plot details.[123] A second trailer was shown during Super Bowl LIX in February 2025.[27] Commentators stated that the trailer appeared to confirm speculation that the titular team would be fighting the Void, the malevolent alter-ego of Bob / Sentry.[124][125] In the trailer, Red Guardian expresses hope that the team's achievements would get them featured on the cover of Wheaties, a cereal known for putting sports figures on its boxes and the slogan "The Breakfast of Champions". Alongside the trailer, Marvel Studios released a poster for the film that mimicked a Wheaties box featuring the team. Their social media posts for the poster were captioned "The Breakfast of Champions Thunderbolts*".[126][127] An asterisk-themed international poster was also released, which included a footnote for the title asterisk which says "The Avengers Are Not Available".[128] Kieran Fisher at /Film questioned whether this was a joke, or if it was the true meaning behind the asterisk in the film's title.[128] James Whitbrook of Gizmodo and Scott Collura from IGN both believed the footnote fit with the film's marketing approach of presenting the team as a ragtag humorous group of heroes,[116][117] rather than the asterisk being an "actual serious mystery".[116]

In March 2025, Letterboxd debuted a trailer for the film that is edited in the style of those for independent films produced by A24. It features techno music, an "A24-esque makeover" for the Marvel Studios logo, and title cards that highlight past A24 projects that the film's cast and crew members worked on. Schreier helped conceive the trailer, which was released around the same time Pugh described the film as an "indie, A24-feeling assassin movie with Marvel superheroes".[92] Zosha Millman from Polygon said Marvel had "film buffs in mind" when releasing the trailer through Letterboxd. Despite the creative pedigree touted by the trailer, she thought Thunderbolts* would still be "largely what you expect" of a Marvel film.[129] A24 was not aware of the trailer before its release and responded on social media with a meme from its HBO drama series Euphoria (2019–present).[92] Later in March, Marvel Studios announced that many MCU cast members would be reprising their roles for the crossover film Avengers: Doomsday, including Stan, Russell, Pugh, Pullman, Harbour, and John-Kamen.[130] Commentators discussed whether this announcement, which seemingly revealed characters who survive the film's events and aligned with speculation that Taskmaster would die early in the story due to limited presence in trailers, was a spoiler.[131][132] Michael Walsh at Nerdist criticized the announcement, feeling it had undermined one of the key reasons some people were interested in Thunderbolts*, which was the feeling that any of the main cast could die. He compared this to spoiling who survives the events of The Dirty Dozen (1967), and said Marvel should have excluded the Thunderbolts* cast members from the Doomsday announcement.[133] Amelia Emberwing of IGN said "knowing who makes it out alive [does not matter] much in a comic book franchise" and also felt the announcement was not necessarily a spoiler because the returning actors could be playing versions of their characters from other universes within the multiverse.[134]

Various fan screenings occurred on April 22, 2025, in 10 major cities across the U.S.[135] At the end of April, Marvel announced a collaboration with Wheaties to create a limited edition box of the cereal, mimicking the Wheaties-inspired poster for the film.[136] The film's marketing campaign was valued at $75 million, and featured partnerships with Harley-Davidson, Tide, Wheaties, Mike and Ike, Cupra Kiro with Formula E racing, LinkedIn, Perfect Sports, and Arizona Beverage Company.[5]


The New Avengers logo
Following the film's opening weekend, Marvel Studios rebranded the film as The New Avengers.[10] The studio released a video of the cast tearing away the Thunderbolts* logo from the poster to reveal The New Avengers, billboards and theater marquees were also updated to The New Avengers,[137] and new posters were released.[5] Schreier explained that revealing and embracing the updated title felt like it was part of the studio's plan and had been built up to since the asterisk was first included in the film's title.[137] Disney clarified that the film's title was not formally retitled, just that the asterisk was "spelled out",[5] and ticketing services still listed the film as Thunderbolts*, despite featuring the updated posters with the New Avengers name. Sydney Bucksbaum of Entertainment Weekly felt this was the first instance a film "planned in advance to change its title a few days after its release for narrative purposes".[4]

Release
Thunderbolts* had its European premiere on April 22, 2025, at the Cineworld Leicester Square, London,[138] and its Los Angeles premiere on April 28, 2025.[139] The film was released in the United States on May 2,[76][140] in IMAX,[141] Dolby Cinema, RealD 3D, ScreenX, and 4DX.[142][143] It was previously scheduled for July 26, 2024,[44] December 20, 2024,[62] and July 25, 2025.[65] It is the final film of Phase Five of the MCU.[118]

Reception
Box office
As of May 14, 2025, Thunderbolts* has grossed $136.8 million in the United States and Canada, and $143.6 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $280.4 million.[3]

In mid-April 2025, Thunderbolts* was projected to have a $63–77 million opening weekend in the United States, with the "target number" expected to be $70 million.[144] By the end of the month, the film was projected to earn $70–75 million domestically and $160–175 million globally on its opening weekend,[145] with some domestic projections going as high as $80–90 million.[146] The film earned $31.5 million domestically in its opening day, including $11.5 million from Thursday night previews. The film would gross $74 million in its domestic opening weekend, while also earning $86.1 million internationally for a total of $160.4 million.[5][3][2][147] In its second weekend the film made $33.1 million, remaining atop the box office. The 55% drop was noted as good for an MCU film, compared to the recent 68% second weekend decrease by Captain America: Brave New World.[148]

Critical response
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 88% of 317 critics gave the film a positive review. The site's critics consensus reads, "Assembling a ragtag band of underdogs with Florence Pugh as their magnetic standout, Thunderbolts* refreshingly goes back to the tried-and-true blueprint of the MCU's best adventures."[149] Metacritic summarized the critical response as "generally favorable", based on a weighted average score of 68 out of 100 from 53 critics.[150] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, while those surveyed by PostTrak gave the film an average of 4.5 out of 5 stars, with 74% saying they would definitely recommend the film.[2][147]

Writing for NPR, critic Bob Mondello gave Thunderbolts* a generally positive review, calling the film a "a decently effective blend of misfit mercenaries and pop psychology".[151] Jake Coyle of the Associated Press gave it 3/4 stars, writing, "All the assembled parts here, including an especially high-quality cast (even Wendell Pierce!) work together seamlessly in a way that Marvel hasn't in some time. Most of all, Pugh commands every bit of the movie."[152]

Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph gave the film 2/5 stars, writing, "It's just dollop upon dollop of dourness, all the way to an end-credits scene that has the nerve to tease brighter, less narratively convoluted times ahead. Talk about creating a market."[153] Nicholas Barber of BBC Culture gave Thunderbolts a generally positive review, praising its character-driven approach and Pugh's performance. He noted that the film offers a more grounded and emotionally resonant narrative compared to recent Marvel releases, while still delivering the expected action and humor.[154]

Accolades
Thunderbolts* is nominated for Favorite Movie, along with Florence Pugh and Sebastian Stan both nominated for Favorite Butt-Kicker at the 2025 Kids' Choice Awards.[155]

Notes
 The asterisk refers to the reveal in the film that the Thunderbolts team become the New Avengers. The title is changed to The New Avengers during the end-credits and in some of the film's post-release marketing,[4] though the official title remains as Thunderbolts*.[5]
 As will be depicted in Avengers: Doomsday (2026)[6]
 Identified off-screen as the Fantastic Four's spacecraft and logo, arriving on Earth-616 from their home reality.[7]
References
 "Thunderbolts* (2025)". Irish Film Classification Office. April 16, 2025. Archived from the original on April 17, 2025. Retrieved April 16, 2025.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 4, 2025). "Box Office: 'Thunderbolts*' Flies to Solid $76M Opening, Alec Baldwin's 'Rust' Flails". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 "Thunderbolts*". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Retrieved May 15, 2025.
 Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 5, 2025). "Thunderbolts* stars help rebrand movie as *The New Avengers, but what are we really calling it now?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 5, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Unveils Title Asterisk In Post-Opening Marketing Stunt; U.S. Box Office Debut At $74M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 2, 2025). "Thunderbolts* director says post-credits scene was shot for Avengers: Doomsday". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 2, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025.
 West, Amy (May 1, 2025). "Thunderbolts ending explained: Who dies? What the asterisk means? How does it set up Avengers: Doomsday?". Total Film. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on May 1, 2025. Retrieved May 1, 2025.
 Panaligan, EJ (September 10, 2022). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' Recruits Florence Pugh, Sebastian Stan, David Harbour, Julia Louis-Dreyfus and More". Variety. Archived from the original on September 10, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2022.
 Travis, Ben (February 11, 2025). "Yelena Belova Is 'A Completely Different Person' In Marvel's Thunderbolts*, Says Florence Pugh". Empire. Archived from the original on February 11, 2025. Retrieved February 11, 2025.
 Davids, Brian (May 5, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Co-Writer Eric Pearson Talks 'The New Avengers' Reveal, Pre-Sentry Villain and Original Taskmaster Arc". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 2, 2025). "Thunderbolts* asterisk explained: Here's what it means for the MCU's future". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 Smith, Tessa (May 2, 2025). "Yelena & Bob's Intense Thunderbolts* Dynamic Couldn't Be More Different From Real Life, Says Florence Pugh: "We Are Just Pissing Ourselves"". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 7, 2025.
 Coggan, Devan (February 14, 2023). "Kevin Feige opens up about Phase 5, Kang, and the future of the MCU". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 14, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2023.
 Stevenson, Rick (February 13, 2025). "Marvel's Thunderbolts Movie Is Making An Avengers Hero A Congressman In The MCU". /Film. Archived from the original on February 13, 2025. Retrieved February 13, 2025.
 Morales, Carlos; Collura, Scott (May 5, 2025). "Thunderbolts Writer Eric Pearson Explains the Marvel Film's Surprising Original Villain". IGN. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 6, 2025.
 D'Addario, Daniel (September 19, 2024). "Sebastian Stan Tells All: Becoming Donald Trump, Gaining 15 Pounds and Starring in 2024's Most Controversial Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on September 20, 2024. Retrieved September 22, 2024.
 Brown, Jodee (February 14, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Star Lewis Pullman Teases What Happens With Sentry in MCU Blockbuster". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 22, 2025. Retrieved February 22, 2025.
 Romano, Nick (April 7, 2025). "Thunderbolts* finally unmasks its villain in new promo: 'Stronger than all of the Avengers'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 7, 2025. Retrieved April 7, 2025.
 Davids, Brian (May 1, 2025). "How 'Thunderbolts*' Director Jake Schreier Infused a Bit of 'Beef' Into the MCU". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 1, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025.
 Power, Tom (April 26, 2025). "Thunderbolts* cast and character guide: Florence Pugh, Sebastian Stan, and more who appear in the Marvel Phase 5 movie". TechRadar. Archived from the original on April 29, 2025. Retrieved May 1, 2025.
 Lye, Jesslyn (May 1, 2025). "Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Geraldine Viswanathan on working together for Marvel's 'Thunderbolts*'". Vogue Singapore. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 4, 2025.
 Vito Oddo, Marco (February 10, 2025). "Marvel's Thunderbolts Reveals First Look at Superman Star's New Character". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Rooney, David (April 29, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Review: Florence Pugh and Sebastian Stan Lead a Gratifyingly Fresh and Soulful Marvel Adventure". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 2, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025.
 Tyrrell, Caitlin (November 27, 2023). "David Harbour Teases The Complexities Of Yelena Belova & Red Guardian In Marvel's Thunderbolts". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023.
 Freitag, Lee (November 15, 2024). "'She Was in Pain': Thunderbolts* Star Reveals How Ghost Has Changed Since Ant-Man 2". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on November 16, 2024. Retrieved November 16, 2024.
 Polo, Susana; Patches, Matt; Goslin, Austen (November 10, 2022). "Valentina Allegra de Fontaine is now one of Marvel's most important characters". Polygon. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022.
 "'Thunderbolts*' Trailer Debuts During Big Game". Marvel.com. February 9, 2025. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 9, 2025.
 Travis, Ben (March 7, 2025). "In Thunderbolts*, Avengers Tower Is Now Val's 'Watchtower': 'A Symbol Of Things Taking A Darker Turn'". Empire. Archived from the original on March 7, 2025. Retrieved March 7, 2025.
 Johnston, Dais (July 27, 2024). "Thunderbolts Trailer Revealed at Comic Con: "There Are Bad Guys and There Are Worse Guys."". Inverse. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved September 18, 2024.
 Nemiroff, Perri; Hunt, Hannah (May 3, 2025). ""She's an Open Wound in That Moment": 'Thunderbolts*' Julia Louis-Dreyfus Reveals Valentina's Greatest Fear". Collider. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 4, 2025.
 Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 5, 2025). "Wyatt Russell 'didn't want to say' Thunderbolts*' 'on your left' Captain America Easter egg". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 8, 2025. Retrieved May 11, 2025.
 Warner, Kara (July 22, 2014). "Guardians of the Galaxy Interview: James Gunn Talks Sequel & Secret End Credits Scenes". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Dolloff, Matt (June 24, 2018). "Ant-Man & The Wasp Star Would Love To Do A Thunderbolts Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Davis, Brandon (May 13, 2021). "James Gunn Reveals Why He Has No Interest in Directing A Thunderbolts Movie For Marvel". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on June 17, 2021. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Knight, Rosie (July 26, 2019). "Will 'Falcon and the Winter Soldier' Unveil Marvel's Next Team?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 29, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Couch, Aaron (June 9, 2022). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' Movie Enlists Director Jake Schreier". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Moreau, Jordan; Vary, Adam B. (June 9, 2022). "Marvel Studios' 'Thunderbolts' Movie in Early Development, Jake Schreier to Direct". Variety. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Romano, Nick (April 29, 2021). "The making of a hero: The Falcon and the Winter Soldier team deconstruct Marvel's new Captain America". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Bonomolo, Cameron (May 5, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Nearly Included Zemo, Goliath, and Red Hulk (Exclusive)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 6, 2025. Retrieved May 7, 2025.
 Russell, Bradley (April 21, 2025). "Thunderbolts director reveals he 'really wanted' Man-Thing on the team, but another Marvel project got there first: "It all worked out for the best"". SFX. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on April 22, 2025. Retrieved April 21, 2025.
 Kroll, Justin (June 9, 2022). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' Movie Taps Jake Schreier As Director". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Kit, Borys (July 26, 2022). "'Avengers: The Kang Dynasty' to Be Directed by 'Shang-Chi' Filmmaker' Destin Daniel Cretton (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved July 26, 2022.
 Collura, Scott (May 5, 2025). "Baron Zemo and Kang Were in Early Drafts of Thunderbolts (and Other Rejected Ideas)". IGN. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 6, 2025.
 Vary, Adam B. (July 23, 2022). "Marvel Studios' Phases 5 and 6: Everything We Learned at Comic-Con About the Multiverse Saga". Variety. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022.
 Shanfeld, Ethan (September 23, 2024). "'Thunderbolts*' Trailer: Marvel Recruits Florence Pugh, Sebastian Stan and David Harbour for a Twisted Team-Up". Variety. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved September 23, 2024.
 Fink, Richard (September 2, 2022). "Florence Pugh's Yelena Reportedly Set To Lead MCU's Thunderbolts Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 3, 2022. Retrieved September 2, 2022.
 Couch, Aaron; Galuppo, Mia; Kit, Borys (October 21, 2022). "Marvel, DC Among Last Bastion for Supersized Paydays". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2022.
 Coggan, Devan (June 9, 2022). "Marvel is reportedly developing a Thunderbolts movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 9, 2022.
 Travis, Ben (March 6, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Will Be The MCU's Toy Story 3: 'Can They Get Out Of The Trash Can Together?'". Empire. Archived from the original on March 6, 2025. Retrieved March 6, 2025.
 Schillaci, Sophie (September 12, 2022). "David Harbour Gives 'Stranger Things' Season 5 Update, Jokes 'You'll See It in Another 15 Years' (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on September 14, 2022. Retrieved September 14, 2022.
 Chuba, Kirsten (November 29, 2023). "Wyatt Russell Teases 'Thunderbolts': "It's Not a Straightforward Marvel Movie as You've Seen in the Past"". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 30, 2023. Retrieved December 7, 2023.
 Barnhardt, Adam (April 9, 2023). "Thunderbolts Receiving Major Rewrites Because of Black Widow (Report)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023.
 Setchfield, Nick; Garbutt, Emily (April 22, 2025). "Thunderbolts isn't a Black Widow sequel, but it's a part of the story: "It's important to everyone to preserve that legacy of something that emotionally meant so much to people"". SFX. GamesRadar+. Archived from the original on April 23, 2025. Retrieved April 23, 2025.
 Kroll, Justin (January 26, 2023). "'The Bear' Breakout Star Ayo Edebiri Joins Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 26, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2023.
 Kroll, Justin (January 29, 2024). "'Thunderbolts': Geraldine Viswanathan Joins Marvel Studios Pic Stepping In For Ayo Edebiri Who Departs Project Due To Scheduling". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 29, 2024. Retrieved January 29, 2024.
 Donnelly, Matt (January 17, 2023). "Julia Louis-Dreyfus Will Shoot Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' in June and Demands to Kick Ass: 'I Really Want to Fight'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 17, 2023.
 Kroll, Justin (February 23, 2023). "'Thunderbolts': Steven Yeun Joins Marvel Studios Pic In Key Role". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2023.
 Behbakht, Andy (November 17, 2023). "Steven Yeun's MCU Role Reportedly Confirmed By Invincible Comic Creator". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 17, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2023.
 Rose, Lacey (June 1, 2023). "How to Get to That "F*** You, I'll Do What I Want" Place: Steven Yeun, John Mulaney and the THR Comedy Actor Roundtable". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 1, 2023. Retrieved June 5, 2023.
 Seo, Rachel (March 29, 2023). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' Adds 'Beef' Creator Lee Sung Jin as Writer (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on March 30, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023.
 Kroll, Justin (May 25, 2023). "Marvel Pushes Pause On 'Thunderbolts' Production Due To Writers Strike". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023.
 McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (June 13, 2023). "'Avatar 3' Pushed a Year to 2025, Two 'Star Wars' Movies Head for 2026 and 'Avengers' Films Delayed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 13, 2023. Retrieved June 13, 2023.
 P. Means, Sean (June 8, 2023). "A Marvel movie appears set to shoot in Utah, under a secret name". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023.
 "Jitterbug Boy – The Shows". Jitterbug Boy. November 19, 2023. Archived from the original on November 19, 2023. Retrieved November 19, 2023.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (November 9, 2023). "Marvel's 'Deadpool 3' Moves To July 2024 & 'Captain America: Brave New World' To 2025 As Disney Shakes Up Schedule Due To Actors Strike". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 10, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023.
 Davis, Brandon. Thunderbolts* Explained: Credits Scene & Shocking Moments | Director Jake Schreier Interview. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025 – via YouTube.
 Bucksbaum, Sydney (May 2, 2025). "Thunderbolts* director explains that 'cold-blooded' death — and why it was added later on". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 7, 2025.
 Robinson, Tasha (May 5, 2025). "Thunderbolts*' writer didn't know Marvel cut his Taskmaster arc until he saw the movie". Polygon. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 Davids, Brian (December 19, 2023). "'Monarch: Legacy of Monsters' Star Wyatt Russell on Why He Waited to Work With Kurt Russell and 'Thunderbolts' Anticipation". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 19, 2023. Retrieved December 19, 2023.
 Sharf, Zack (January 21, 2024). "Sebastian Stan Says 'I've Missed' Marvel and MCU's 'Batting Average Is So High'; Talks 'A Different Man' 22-Day Shoot and Hyperventilating in His 'Mother!' Audition". Variety. Archived from the original on January 21, 2024. Retrieved January 21, 2024.
 Couch, Aaron (January 2, 2024). "Steven Yeun Will Not Star in Marvel's 'Thunderbolts'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 3, 2024. Retrieved January 2, 2024.
 Zee, Michaela; Malkin, Marc (January 3, 2024). "Steven Yeun Is 'Sorry' He Dropped Out of Marvel's 'Thunderbolts,' Cites Strike and Scheduling Issues: 'I Wanna Do a Marvel Movie'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024.
 Zee, Michaela (January 2, 2024). "Steven Yeun No Longer Involved in Marvel's 'Thunderbolts'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 3, 2024. Retrieved January 3, 2024.
 Couch, Aaron (January 25, 2024). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts': Lewis Pullman Top Choice to Replace Steven Yeun". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 26, 2024. Retrieved January 25, 2024.
 "Marvel Studios' "Thunderbolts" Eyeing "Top Gun: Maverick" Star Lewis Pullman for Big Role". The Credits. Motion Picture Association. January 26, 2024. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 27, 2024.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 14, 2024). "Marvel Moves On The Theatrical Sked: 'Thunderbolts' Shifts Up; 'The Fantastic Four' Moves Back In 2025". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 14, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024.
 Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (February 21, 2024). "How Marvel Is Quietly Retooling Amid Superhero Fatigue". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 21, 2024. Retrieved February 21, 2024.
 "Thunderbolts – WGA Directory". Writers Guild of America West. March 31, 2025. Archived from the original on April 12, 2025. Retrieved April 11, 2025.
 Ayala, Nicolas (May 5, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Writer Reveals John Walker Was Originally The Main Villain And Why It Became Sentry/The Void Instead". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 Vary, Adam B. (May 3, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Director on That Credits Scene, Shame Rooms They Didn't Use and Making a Marvel Movie About Depression: 'I Don't Want This to Be the Weird One'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 4, 2025. Retrieved May 4, 2025.
 Phillips, Zoe G. (March 27, 2024). "Florence Pugh Shares Tour of 'Thunderbolts' Set and Previews Yelena's Combat Suit". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 28, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024.
 Bradley, Ollie (April 11, 2024). "Kevin Feige Comments On Marvel Adding An Asterisk To The Thunderbolts* Movie Title". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 11, 2024. Retrieved April 11, 2024.
 Agar, Chris (May 1, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Post-Credits Scene Was An Incredibly Last-Minute Addition (& Here's How Late)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025.
 Patterson, Adreon (September 12, 2023). "Florence Pugh Sounds As Bummed As I Am That Marvel's Upcoming Thunderbolts Movie Couldn't Film In Atlanta This Summer". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023. Retrieved September 16, 2023.
 Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (May 5, 2023). "Marvel Hits Pause on 'Blade' Due to Writers Strike (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023.
 Allen, Ben (October 7, 2024). "How Sebastian Stan became Donald Trump in The Apprentice". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 7, 2024. Retrieved October 8, 2024.
 Coley, Samantha (November 15, 2022). "David Harbour Says He'll Be Filming 'Stranger Things' 5 and 'Thunderbolts' at the Same Time [Exclusive]". Collider. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 16, 2022.
 Goldberg, Lesley (May 6, 2023). "'Stranger Things' Final Season Production Delayed by Labor Unrest". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 6, 2023. Retrieved May 6, 2023.
 Ridgley, Charlie (February 26, 2024). "Thunderbolts Star Florence Pugh Confirms Marvel Movie Is Now Filming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 26, 2024. Retrieved February 26, 2024.
 Staropoli, Anna (November 1, 2023). "This Walkable Georgia Town Uses Geothermal Energy to Power Its Homes". Commercial Observer. Archived from the original on February 27, 2024. Retrieved February 27, 2024.
 Ho, Rodney (February 7, 2024). "What's filming in Georgia in February 2024?". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved February 20, 2024.
 Tangcay, Jazz; Jackson, Angelique; Coates, Lauren (March 7, 2025). "Marvel's New 'Thunderbolts' Teaser Touts Connections to A24's 'Hereditary,' 'Beef' and 'Everything Everywhere All at Once'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 11, 2025. Retrieved March 11, 2025.
 Chitwood, Adam (April 24, 2022). "How Cinematographer Andrew Droz Palermo Went From 'The Green Knight' to Marvel's 'Moon Knight'". TheWrap. Archived from the original on May 12, 2025.
 Stephenson, Miles (May 24, 2023). "Poker Face DP Steve Yedlin on Creating His Own Imaging Algorithm, Drawing From '70s Influences, and Carving Out a Visual Niche for Himself". Below the Line. Archived from the original on May 24, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2023.
 "Steve Yedlin, ASC" (PDF). Innovative Artists. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2023.
 Ayala, Nicolas (April 11, 2024). "Kevin Feige Confirms The Fantastic Four Starts Filming Soon". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 12, 2024. Retrieved April 12, 2024.
 "Film Job Opportunities". Utah Film Commission. Archived from the original on April 18, 2024. Retrieved April 18, 2024.
 Shanfeld, Ethan (June 8, 2024). "Julia Louis-Dreyfus on Her 'Cuckoo Bananas' New Film 'Tuesday,' Why 'Seinfeld' Finale Backlash Never Bothered Her and Why a 'Veep' Revival Is 'Doubtful'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 8, 2024. Retrieved June 8, 2024.
 Blevins, Adam (June 19, 2024). "Julia Louis-Dreyfus Offers an Exciting 'Thunderbolts*' Update". Collider. Archived from the original on June 19, 2024. Retrieved June 19, 2024.
 Garcia-Navarro (June 8, 2024). "The Interview: The Darker Side of Julia Louis-Dreyfus". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 11, 2024. Retrieved June 11, 2024.
 "Kuala Lumpur jadi lokasi penggambaran filem Marvel 'Thunderbolts'". Astro Awani (in Malay). June 28, 2024. Archived from the original on June 28, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2025.
 "Yes, that was Florence Pugh in Malaysia — 'jumping off second-tallest building in world'". Malay Mail. August 2, 2024. Archived from the original on August 3, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2025.
 Sharf, Zack (April 14, 2025). "Florence Pugh Says Marvel Didn't Want Her to Jump Off the World's Second Tallest Building Due to 'Thunderbolts' Insurance Risk; She Emailed Kevin Feige: 'It'll Do Wonders for the Press Tour'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 15, 2025. Retrieved April 15, 2025.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (June 19, 2024). "Disney Fêtes 'Inside Out 2', Slays With 'Deadpool' and 'Alien: Romulus' Footage, Shows Off New Look At 'Moana 2' – CineEurope". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 19, 2024. Retrieved June 19, 2024.
 Franklin, Garth (September 30, 2024). "Pierce, Bauer Join Marvel's "Thunderbolts"". Dark Horizons. Archived from the original on October 1, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2025.
 McPherson, Chris (December 5, 2024). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts*' Heads Back to Atlanta For Reshoots...Again". Collider. Archived from the original on December 5, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2025.
 Frei, Vincent (February 10, 2025). "Thunderbolts*". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on March 2, 2025. Retrieved March 1, 2025.
 Bonomolo, Cameron (May 6, 2025). "Thunderbolts* / New Avengers: Alternate Fantastic Four Post-Credits Scene Revealed". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2025. Retrieved May 7, 2025.
 "Son Lux Scoring Marvel Studios' 'Thunderbolts*'". Film Music Reporter. February 9, 2025. Archived from the original on February 9, 2025. Retrieved February 9, 2025.
 "'Thunderbolts*' Soundtrack Album Details". Film Music Reporter. April 29, 2025. Archived from the original on April 29, 2025. Retrieved April 29, 2025.
 Lopez, Kristen (March 27, 2024). "Florence Pugh Shares First Look at Marvel's 'Thunderbolts' With On-Set Video". TheWrap. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024.
 Graves, Sabina (March 27, 2024). "Florence Pugh Takes Us on a Tour of the Thunderbolts Set". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024.
 McPherson, Chris (March 27, 2024). "Florence Pugh Is Breaking the Rules With New 'Thunderbolts' Set Video". Collider. Archived from the original on March 27, 2024. Retrieved March 27, 2024.
 Ankers-Range, Adele (April 12, 2024). "Marvel Fans Are Trying to Figure Out Why Thunderbolts Has an Asterisk in the Title". IGN. Archived from the original on April 12, 2024. Retrieved April 12, 2024.
 El-Mahmoud, Sarah (April 11, 2024). "Marvel's Thunderbolts Got A Slight Title Change, And Now I'm Really Confused". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 12, 2024. Retrieved April 12, 2024.
 Whitbrook, James (February 11, 2025). "An International Poster Might Have Just Explained Thunderbolts' Whole Asterisk Deal". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on February 12, 2025. Retrieved February 13, 2025.
 Collura, Scott (February 11, 2025). "Why Are the Thunderbolts* Called That, and Did Marvel Just Explain the Asterisk in the Title?". IGN. Archived from the original on February 12, 2025. Retrieved February 13, 2025.
 Grobar, Matt; D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 27, 2024). "David Harbour Is The Only To Dress Up At 'Thunderbolts*' Comic-Con Session, First Trailer Unveiled". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 28, 2024. Retrieved July 27, 2024.
 Coogan, Devan (July 27, 2024). "SDCC 2024: Marvel Studios' 'Thunderbolts*' Cast Teases the Film in Hall H". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2024. Retrieved July 29, 2024.
 Romano, Nick (August 29, 2024). "Marvel marks 85 years with Thunderbolts, Daredevil, Red Hulk first looks (exclusive)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 29, 2024. Retrieved August 29, 2024.
 Young, Kai (September 23, 2024). "What Song Is In Marvel's Thunderbolts* Trailer?". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved September 23, 2024.
 Power, Tom (September 23, 2024). "New trailer for Marvel's Thunderbolts movie unveils official look at Lewis Pullman's Bob and Yelena Belova's anti-hero squad after August teaser leak". TechRadar. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Carr, Mary Kate (September 23, 2024). "Marvel's Thunderbolts* teaser valiantly refuses to give away the plot". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on September 23, 2024. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 King, Jordan (February 10, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Super Bowl Trailer Sees MCU Anti-Heroes Prepare To Face Mystery New Villain". Empire. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Polo, Susana (February 10, 2025). "Marvel's Thunderbolts* shows off a spooky new villain". Polygon. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Wasserman, Ben (February 9, 2025). "Thunderbolts* Super Bowl Trailer Previews the Team's Melodramatic and Comedic Struggles". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Adams, Tim (February 10, 2025). "The New Thunderbolts Poster Is Perfect (And a First for Marvel)". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Fisher, Kieran (February 10, 2025). "Marvel May Have Revealed Why The Thunderbolts* Title Has An Asterisk". /Film. Archived from the original on February 11, 2025. Retrieved February 10, 2025.
 Millman, Zosha (March 7, 2025). "Marvel wants that 'A24-feeling' — but it'll take more than A24 talent". Polygon. Archived from the original on March 8, 2025. Retrieved March 11, 2025.
 Couch, Aaron; Kit, Borys (March 26, 2025). "Marvel Unveils 'Avengers: Doomsday' Cast with MCU Mainstays and 'X-Men', 'Fantastic Four' Stars". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 26, 2025. Retrieved March 26, 2025.
 Hein, Michael (March 26, 2025). "Did Marvel Studios Just Spoil Thunderbolts in a Big Way?". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2025. Retrieved April 1, 2025.
 Johnston, Dais (March 26, 2025). "'Thunderbolts' May Secretly Be The Most Important New MCU Movie". Inverse. Archived from the original on March 28, 2025. Retrieved April 1, 2025.
 Walsh, Michael (March 27, 2025). "Did Marvel's Avengers: Doomsday Cast Announcement Really Have to Spoil Thunderbolts*?". Nerdist. Archived from the original on March 28, 2025. Retrieved April 1, 2025.
 Emberwing, Amelia (March 27, 2025). "No, the Avengers: Doomsday Cast Announcements Didn't Spoil Thunderbolts (Probably)". IGN. Archived from the original on March 27, 2025. Retrieved April 1, 2025.
 Booth, Kailtlyn (April 16, 2025). "Thunderbolts*: Final Trailer, New Poster, Tickets For Fan Screenings". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on April 16, 2025. Retrieved April 16, 2025.
 Sheehan, Gavin (April 28, 2025). "Marvel's Thunderbolts* Grace The Box Of Wheaties". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on April 29, 2025. Retrieved April 29, 2025.
 Sharf, Zack (May 5, 2025). "Marvel Changes 'Thunderbolts*' Posters to Replace Movie Title With 'The New Avengers' — but It's a Spoiler for the Movie's Big Reveal". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 "'Thunderbolts' premiere: See Florence Pugh, Pedro Pascal, Julia Louis-Dreyfus and more". USA Today. April 23, 2025. Archived from the original on April 23, 2025. Retrieved April 23, 2025.
 Vasquez, Ingrid (April 29, 2025). "Florence Pugh Electrifies the Thunderbolts* L.A. Premiere in Timeless Pastel Gown". People. Archived from the original on April 29, 2025. Retrieved April 29, 2025.
 Vary, Adam B. (August 2, 2024). "Marvel Removes 2026 Title, Searchlight's 'A Real Pain' Moves to November in Major Disney Release Date Update". Variety. Archived from the original on August 2, 2024. Retrieved August 2, 2024.
 Roxborough, Scott (May 16, 2024). "Imax Unveils 2025 Film Slate, Including 'Superman: Legacy' and 'The Fantastic Four'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 16, 2024. Retrieved May 16, 2024.
 Goldsmith, Jill (March 26, 2025). "AMC Entertainment To Bring ScreenX, 4DX Premium Formats To U.S. Theaters For First Time". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 26, 2025. Retrieved March 26, 2025.
 Schreur, Brandon (April 7, 2025). "Marvel's Thunderbolts* Assemble in New Posters, Tickets Now on Sale". SuperHeroHype. Archived from the original on April 12, 2025. Retrieved April 12, 2025.
 McClintock, Pamela (April 10, 2025). "Marvel's 'Thunderbolts*' Tracking for Fair $70M U.S. Opening". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 10, 2025. Retrieved April 12, 2025.
 Rubin, Rebecca (April 30, 2025). "Box Office: 'Thunderbolts' Targets $75 Million Opening Weekend". Variety. Archived from the original on April 30, 2025. Retrieved April 30, 2025.
 "Box Office: Weekend Preview: Thunderbolts* Tracking to $80M Opening Weekend". Boxoffice Pro. Archived from the original on April 30, 2025. Retrieved April 30, 2025.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 4, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Settles At $76M Opening, 'Sinners' Full Of Grace With $33M, 'Rust' Not Good – Sunday AM Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 5, 2025. Retrieved May 5, 2025.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 11, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' Simmers $33M 2nd Frame; 'Sinners' Strong $21M 4th Weekend; Making Sense Of Single Digit Bows 'Clown', 'Shadow Force' & 'Fight Or Flight' – Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 11, 2025.
 "Thunderbolts*". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved May 16, 2025.
 "Thunderbolts*". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 10, 2025.
 Mondello, Bob (May 1, 2025). "'Thunderbolts*' is a refreshing misfit hit after many Marvel misfires". NPR. Archived from the original on May 1, 2025. Retrieved May 1, 2025.
 Coyle, Jake (May 2, 2025). "Movie Review: 'Thunderbolts' is Marvel, and Florence Pugh, in high gear". Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 4, 2025. Retrieved May 6, 2025.
 Collin, Robbie (May 1, 2025). "Thunderbolts*, review: Not even Florence Pugh can save this morose Marvel yawn-fest". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 3, 2025. Retrieved May 6, 2025.
 Barber, Nicholas (April 29, 2025). "Thunderbolts* review: 'The greatest Marvel offering in years'". BBC. Archived from the original on April 30, 2025. Retrieved May 2, 2025.
 Petski, Denise (May 15, 2025). "Ariana Grande, Lady Gaga, Kendrick Lamar & Selena Gomez Lead 2025 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards Nominees; Tyla To Host". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 15, 2025. Retrieved May 15, 2025.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Thunderbolts*.
Official website Edit this at Wikidata at Marvel.com
Thunderbolts* at IMDb Edit this at Wikidata
Motion poster revealing The New Avengers title
Thunderbolts*
Portals:
 Film
flag United States
icon Speculative fiction
icon Comics
Categories: 2025 films2020s American films2020s English-language films2020s superhero films2025 science fiction action films4DX filmsAmerican science fiction action filmsAmerican superhero filmsAmerican vigilante filmsEnglish-language science fiction action filmsFilms about mental healthFilms directed by Jake SchreierFilms scored by Son LuxFilms set in 2027Films set in 2028Films set in Kuala LumpurFilms set in New York CityFilms set in Washington, D.C.Films shot at Trilith StudiosFilms shot in AtlantaFilms shot in Kuala LumpurFilms shot in UtahFilms with screenplays by Eric PearsonIMAX filmsMarvel Cinematic Universe: Phase Five filmsNew AvengersScreenX filmsSuperhero crossover filmsThunderbolts (comics)
This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 23:36 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Thunderbolts*

37 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot

Style and allusions

Themes
Development history

Reception

Legacy

Awards, honours, and recognition
Adaptations

Attractions
Supplementary works
See also
References
Sources
Further reading
External links
Harry Potter

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Page semi-protected
Listen to this article
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the novel series. For the character, see Harry Potter (character). For the film series, see Harry Potter (film series). For the franchise, see Wizarding World. For the universe, see Fictional universe of Harry Potter. For other uses, see Harry Potter (disambiguation).

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources. Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources.
Find sources: "Harry Potter" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR (March 2025) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Harry Potter

Philosopher's Stone (1997)
Chamber of Secrets (1998)
Prisoner of Azkaban (1999)
Goblet of Fire (2000)
Order of the Phoenix (2003)
Half-Blood Prince (2005)
Deathly Hallows (2007)
Author	J. K. Rowling
Cover artist	Thomas Taylor, Cliff Wright, Giles Greenfield, Jason Cockcroft
Country	United Kingdom
Language	English
Genre	Fantasy
Publisher	Bloomsbury
Published	26 June 1997 – 21 July 2007
Media type	
Print (hardback and paperback)
Audiobook
E-book
No. of books	7
Website	harrypotter.com
Harry Potter is a series of seven fantasy novels written by British author J. K. Rowling. The novels chronicle the lives of a young wizard, Harry Potter, and his friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger, all of whom are students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. The main story arc concerns Harry's conflict with Lord Voldemort, a dark wizard who intends to become immortal, overthrow the wizard governing body known as the Ministry of Magic, and subjugate all wizards and Muggles (non-magical people).

The series was originally published in English by Bloomsbury in the United Kingdom and Scholastic Press in the United States. A series of many genres, including fantasy, drama, coming-of-age fiction, and the British school story (which includes elements of mystery, thriller, adventure, horror, and romance), the world of Harry Potter explores numerous themes and includes many cultural meanings and references.[1] Major themes in the series include prejudice, corruption, madness, love, and death.[2]

Since the release of the first novel, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, on 26 June 1997, the books have found immense popularity and commercial success worldwide. They have attracted a wide adult audience as well as younger readers and are widely considered cornerstones of modern literature,[3][4] though the books have received mixed reviews from critics and literary scholars. As of February 2023, the books have sold more than 600 million copies worldwide, making them the best-selling book series in history, available in dozens of languages. The last four books all set records as the fastest-selling books in history, with the final instalment selling roughly 2.7 million copies in the United Kingdom and 8.3 million copies in the United States within twenty-four hours of its release. It holds the Guinness World Record for "Best-selling book series for children."[5]

Warner Bros. Pictures adapted the original seven books into an eight-part namesake film series. In 2016, the total value of the Harry Potter franchise was estimated at $25 billion,[6] making it one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time. Harry Potter and the Cursed Child is a play based on a story co-written by Rowling. A television series based on the books is in production at HBO.

The success of the books and films has allowed the Harry Potter franchise to expand with numerous derivative works, a travelling exhibition that premiered in Chicago in 2009, a studio tour in London that opened in 2012, a digital platform on which J. K. Rowling updates the series with new information and insight, and a trilogy of spin-off films premiering in November 2016 with Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them, among many other developments. Themed attractions, collectively known as The Wizarding World of Harry Potter, have been built at several Universal Destinations & Experiences amusement parks around the world.

Plot
Further information: Fictional universe of Harry Potter
Early years
"The Elephant House", a small, painted red café where Rowling wrote a few chapters of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
The Elephant House was one of the cafés in Edinburgh where Rowling wrote the first part of Harry Potter.
The series follows the life of a boy named Harry Potter. In the first book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone in the US), Harry lives in a cupboard under the stairs in the house of the Dursleys, his aunt, uncle and cousin, who all treat him poorly. At the age of 11, Harry discovers that he is a wizard. He meets a half-giant named Hagrid who gives him a letter of acceptance to attend the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. Harry learns that his parents, Lily and James Potter, also had magical powers and were murdered by the dark wizard Lord Voldemort when Harry was a baby. When Voldemort attempted to kill Harry, his curse rebounded, seemingly killing Voldemort, and Harry survived with a lightning-shaped scar on his forehead. The event made Harry famous among the community of wizards and witches.

Harry becomes a student at Hogwarts and is sorted into Gryffindor House. He gains the friendship of Ron Weasley, a member of a large but poor wizarding family, and Hermione Granger, a witch of non-magical, or Muggle, parentage. The trio develop an enmity with the rich pure-blood student Draco Malfoy. Harry encounters the school's headmaster, Albus Dumbledore; the potions professor, Severus Snape, who displays a dislike for him; and the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, Quirinus Quirrell. Quirrell turns out to be allied with Voldemort, who is still alive as a weak spirit. The first book concludes with Harry's confrontation with Voldemort, who, in his quest to regain a body, yearns to possess the Philosopher's Stone, a substance that bestows everlasting life.

Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets describes Harry's second year at Hogwarts. Students are attacked and petrified by an unknown creature; wizards of Muggle parentage are the primary targets. The attacks appear related to the mythical Chamber of Secrets and resemble attacks fifty years earlier. Harry discovers an ability to speak the snake language Parseltongue, which he learns is rare and associated with the Dark Arts. When Hermione is attacked and Ron's younger sister Ginny Weasley is abducted, Harry and Ron uncover the chamber's secrets and enter it. Harry discovers that Ginny was possessed by an old diary, inside which the memory of Tom Marvolo Riddle, Voldemort's younger self, resides. On Voldemort's behalf, Ginny opened the chamber and unleashed the basilisk, an ancient monster that kills or petrifies those who make direct or indirect eye contact, respectively. With the help of Dumbledore's phoenix, Fawkes, and the Sword of Gryffindor, Harry slays the basilisk and destroys the diary.

In the third novel, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, Harry learns that he is targeted by Sirius Black, an escaped convict who allegedly assisted in his parents' murder. Dementors, creatures that feed on happiness, search for Sirius and guard the school. As Harry struggles with his reaction to the dementors, he reaches out to Remus Lupin, a new professor who teaches him the Patronus charm. On a windy night, Ron is dragged by a black dog into the Shrieking Shack, a haunted house, and Harry and Hermione follow. The dog is revealed to be Sirius Black. Lupin enters the shack and explains that Sirius was James Potter's best friend; he was framed by another friend of James, Peter Pettigrew, who hides as Ron's pet rat, Scabbers. As the full moon rises, Lupin transforms into a werewolf and bounds away, and the group chase after him. They are surrounded by dementors, but are saved by a figure resembling James who casts a stag Patronus. This is later revealed to be a future version of Harry, who traveled back in time with Hermione using a device called a Time Turner. The duo help Sirius escape on a Hippogriff, while Pettigrew escapes.

Voldemort returns

The former 1st floor Nicholson's Cafe now renamed Spoon in Edinburgh where J. K. Rowling wrote the first few chapters of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
In Harry's fourth year of school (detailed in Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire), Hogwarts hosts the Triwizard Tournament, a contest between Hogwarts and the schools Beauxbatons and Durmstrang. Harry is unwillingly entered into the contest, becoming Hogwarts' second participant after Cedric Diggory, an unusual occurrence that causes his friends to distance themselves from him. Harry claims the Triwizard Cup with Cedric, but he is teleported to a graveyard where Pettigrew kills Cedric, then resurrects Voldemort using Harry's blood. Voldemort convenes his supporters, the Death Eaters, and Harry manages to escape after a duel with Voldemort. Upon returning to Hogwarts, it is revealed that a Death Eater, Barty Crouch, Jr, in disguise as the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor, Alastor "Mad-Eye" Moody, engineered Harry's entry into the tournament, secretly helped him, and had him teleported to Voldemort.

In the fifth book, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the Ministry of Magic refuses to believe that Voldemort has returned. Dumbledore re-activates the Order of the Phoenix, a secret society to counter Voldemort; meanwhile, the Ministry tightens control of Hogwarts by appointing Dolores Umbridge as High Inquisitor of Hogwarts, and she gradually increases her powers. When Umbridge bans practical teaching of Defence Against the Dark Arts, Harry, Ron and Hermione form "Dumbledore's Army", a secret group to continue the teachings. Harry has recurring dreams of a dark corridor in the Ministry of Magic, eventually dreaming that Sirius is being tortured there. He races to the Ministry with his friends, but it is a trap, planted in his head by Voldemort. The group are attacked by Death Eaters and saved by the Order of the Phoenix, but Sirius is killed in the battle. A duel between Dumbledore and Voldemort convinces the ministry of Voldemort's return. A prophecy concerning Harry and Voldemort is revealed: one must die at the hands of the other.

In the sixth book, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, Snape teaches Defence Against the Dark Arts while Horace Slughorn becomes the Potions master. Harry finds an old textbook with annotations by the Half-Blood Prince, due to which he achieves success in Potions class. Harry also takes lessons with Dumbledore, viewing memories about the early life of Voldemort in a device called a Pensieve. Harry learns from a drunken Slughorn that he used to teach Tom Riddle, and that Voldemort divided his soul into pieces, creating a series of Horcruxes. Harry and Dumbledore travel to a distant lake to destroy a Horcrux; they succeed, but Dumbledore weakens. On their return, they find Draco Malfoy and Death Eaters attacking the school. The book ends with the killing of Dumbledore by Professor Snape, the titular Half-Blood Prince.

In Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, the seventh and final novel in the series, Lord Voldemort gains control of the Ministry of Magic. Harry, Ron and Hermione learn about the Deathly Hallows, legendary items that lead to mastery over death. The group infiltrates the ministry, where they steal a locket Horcrux, and visit Godric's Hollow, where they are attacked by Nagini, Voldemort's snake. A silver doe Patronus leads them to the Sword of Gryffindor, with which they destroy the locket. They steal a Horcrux from Gringotts and travel to Hogwarts, culminating in a battle with the Death Eaters. Snape is killed by Voldemort out of paranoia, but he lends Harry his memories before he dies. Harry learns that Snape was always loyal to Dumbledore, and that Harry is himself a Horcrux. Harry surrenders to Voldemort and is hit with the killing curse; however he is not killed as the protection Lily gave him lives on within Voldemort since he used Harry's blood to resurrect himself . The defenders of Hogwarts continue to fight on; Harry comes back from limbo, faces Voldemort and kills him.

An epilogue titled "Nineteen Years Later" describes the lives of the surviving characters and the impact of Voldemort's death. Harry and Ginny are married with three children, and Ron and Hermione are married with two children.

Style and allusions
Genre and style
The novels fall into the genre of fantasy literature, and qualify as a type of fantasy called "urban fantasy", "contemporary fantasy", or "low fantasy". They are mainly dramas, and maintain a fairly serious and dark tone throughout, though they do contain some notable instances of tragicomedy and black humour. In many respects, they are also examples of the bildungsroman, or coming of age novel,[7] and contain elements of mystery, adventure, horror, thriller, and romance. The books are also, in the words of Stephen King, "shrewd mystery tales",[8] and each book is constructed in the manner of a Sherlock Holmes-style mystery adventure. The stories are told from a third person limited point of view with very few exceptions (such as the opening chapters of Philosopher's Stone, Goblet of Fire and Deathly Hallows and the first two chapters of Half-Blood Prince).

The series can be considered part of the British children's boarding school genre, which includes Rudyard Kipling's Stalky & Co., Enid Blyton's Malory Towers, St. Clare's and the Naughtiest Girl series, and Frank Richards's Billy Bunter novels: the Harry Potter books are predominantly set in Hogwarts, a fictional British boarding school for wizards, where the curriculum includes the use of magic.[9] In this sense they are "in a direct line of descent from Thomas Hughes's Tom Brown's School Days and other Victorian and Edwardian novels of British public school life", though they are, as many note, more contemporary, grittier, darker, and more mature than the typical boarding school novel, addressing serious themes of death, love, loss, prejudice, coming-of-age, and the loss of innocence in a 1990s British setting.[10][11][failed verification]

In Harry Potter, Rowling juxtaposes the extraordinary against the ordinary.[12] Her narrative features two worlds: a contemporary world inhabited by non-magical people called Muggles, and another featuring wizards. It differs from typical portal fantasy in that its magical elements stay grounded in the mundane.[13] Paintings move and talk; books bite readers; letters shout messages; and maps show live journeys, making the wizarding world both exotic and familiar.[12][14] This blend of realistic and romantic elements extends to Rowling's characters. Their names are often onomatopoeic[clarification needed]: Malfoy is difficult, Filch is unpleasant, and Lupin is a werewolf.[15][16] Harry is ordinary and relatable, with down-to-earth features such as wearing broken glasses;[17] the scholar Roni Natov terms him an "everychild".[18] These elements serve to highlight Harry when he is heroic, making him both an everyman and a fairytale hero.[17][19]

Each of the seven books is set over the course of one school year. Harry struggles with the problems he encounters, and dealing with them often involves the need to violate some school rules. If students are caught breaking rules, they are often disciplined by Hogwarts professors. The stories reach their climax in the summer term, near or just after final exams, when events escalate far beyond in-school squabbles and struggles, and Harry must confront either Voldemort or one of his followers, the Death Eaters, with the stakes a matter of life and death—a point underlined, as the series progresses, by characters being killed in each of the final four books.[20][21] In the aftermath, he learns important lessons through exposition and discussions with head teacher and mentor Albus Dumbledore. The only exception to this school-centred setting is the final novel, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, in which Harry and his friends spend most of their time away from Hogwarts, and only return there to face Voldemort at the dénouement.[20]

Allusions
The Harry Potter stories feature imagery and motifs drawn from Arthurian myth and fairytales. Harry's ability to draw the Sword of Gryffindor from the Sorting Hat resembles the Arthurian sword in the stone legend.[22] His life with the Dursleys has been compared to Cinderella.[23] Hogwarts resembles a medieval university-cum-castle with several professors who belong to an Order of Merlin; Old Professor Binns still lectures about the International Warlock Convention of 1289; and a real historical person, a 14th-century scribe, Sir Nicolas Flamel, is described as a holder of the Philosopher's Stone.[24] Other medieval elements in Hogwarts include coats-of-arms and medieval weapons on the walls, letters written on parchment and sealed with wax, the Great Hall of Hogwarts, which is similar to the Great Hall of Camelot, the use of Latin phrases, the tents put up for Quidditch tournaments, which are similar to the "marvellous tents" put up for knightly tournaments, imaginary animals like dragons and unicorns that exist around Hogwarts, and the banners with heraldic animals for the four Houses of Hogwarts.[24]

Many of the motifs of the Potter stories, such as the hero's quest invoking objects that confer invisibility, magical animals and trees, a forest full of danger and the recognition of a character based upon scars, are drawn from medieval French Arthurian romances.[24] Other aspects borrowed from French Arthurian romances include the use of owls as messengers, werewolves as characters, and white deer.[24] The American scholars Heather Arden and Kathrn Lorenz in particular argue that many aspects of the Potter stories are inspired by a 14th-century French Arthurian romance, Claris et Laris, writing of the "startling" similarities between the adventures of Potter and the knight Claris.[24] Arden and Lorenz noted that Rowling graduated from the University of Exeter in 1986 with a degree in French literature and spent a year living in France afterwards.[24]

Like C. S. Lewis's The Chronicles of Narnia, Harry Potter also contains Christian symbolism and allegory. The series has been viewed as a Christian moral fable in the psychomachia tradition, in which stand-ins for good and evil fight for supremacy over a person's soul.[25] Children's literature critic Joy Farmer sees parallels between Harry and Jesus Christ.[26] Comparing Rowling with Lewis, she argues that "magic is both authors' way of talking about spiritual reality".[27] According to Maria Nikolajeva, Christian imagery is particularly strong in the final scenes of the series: Harry dies in self-sacrifice and Voldemort delivers an "ecce homo" speech, after which Harry is resurrected and defeats his enemy.[28]

Rowling stated that she did not reveal Harry Potter's religious parallels in the beginning because doing so would have "give[n] too much away to fans who might then see the parallels".[29] In the final book of the series, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, Rowling makes the book's Christian imagery more explicit, quoting both Matthew 6:21 and 1 Corinthians 15:26 (King James Version) when Harry visits his parents' graves.[29] Hermione Granger teaches Harry Potter that the meaning of these verses from the Christian Bible are "living beyond death. Living after death", which Rowling states "epitomize the whole series".[29][30][31] Rowling also exhibits Christian values in developing Albus Dumbledore as a God-like character, the divine, trusted leader of the series, guiding the long-suffering hero along his quest. In the seventh novel, Harry speaks with and questions the deceased Dumbledore much like a person of faith would talk to and question God.[32][full citation needed]

Themes
J.K. Rowling, a blond, blue-eyed woman, who is the author of the series
The novelist, J. K. Rowling
Harry Potter's overarching theme is death.[33][34] In the first book, when Harry looks into the Mirror of Erised, he feels both joy and "a terrible sadness" at seeing his desire: his parents, alive and with him.[35] Confronting their loss is central to Harry's character arc and manifests in different ways through the series, such as in his struggles with Dementors.[35][36] Other characters in Harry's life die; he even faces his own death in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows.[37] The series has an existential perspective—Harry must grow mature enough to accept death.[38] In Harry's world, death is not binary but mutable, a state that exists in degrees.[39] Unlike Voldemort, who evades death by separating and hiding his soul in seven parts, Harry's soul is whole, nourished by friendship and love.[38]

Love distinguishes Harry and Voldemort. Harry is a hero because he loves others, even willing to accept death to save them; Voldemort is a villain because he does not.[40] Harry carries the protection of his mother's sacrifice in his blood; Voldemort, who wants Harry's blood and the protection it carries, does not understand that love vanquishes death.[26]

Rowling has spoken about thematising death and loss in the series. Soon after she started writing Philosopher's Stone, her mother died; she said that "I really think from that moment on, death became a central, if not the central theme of the seven books".[41] Rowling has described Harry as "the prism through which I view death", and further stated that "all of my characters are defined by their attitude to death and the possibility of death".[42]

While Harry Potter can be viewed as a story about good vs. evil, its moral divisions are not absolute.[43][44] First impressions of characters are often misleading. Harry assumes in the first book that Quirrell is on the side of good because he opposes Snape, who appears to be malicious; in reality, Quirrell is an agent of Voldemort, while Snape is loyal to Dumbledore. This pattern later recurs with Moody and Snape.[43] In Rowling's world, good and evil are choices rather than inherent attributes: second chances and the possibility of redemption are key themes of the series.[45][46] This is reflected in Harry's self-doubts after learning his connections to Voldemort, such as Parseltongue;[45] and prominently in Snape's characterisation, which has been described as complex and multifaceted.[47] In some scholars' view, while Rowling's narrative appears on the surface to be about Harry, her focus may actually be on Snape's morality and character arc.[48][49]

Rowling said that, to her, the moral significance of the tales seems "blindingly obvious". In the fourth book, Dumbledore speaks of a "choice between what is right and what is easy"; Rowling views this as a key theme, "because that ... is how tyranny is started, with people being apathetic and taking the easy route and suddenly finding themselves in deep trouble".[50]

Academics and journalists have developed many other interpretations of themes in the books, some more complex than others, and some including political subtexts. Themes such as normality, oppression, survival, and overcoming imposing odds have all been considered as prevalent throughout the series.[51] Similarly, the theme of making one's way through adolescence and "going over one's most harrowing ordeals—and thus coming to terms with them" has also been considered.[52] Rowling has stated that the books comprise "a prolonged argument for tolerance, a prolonged plea for an end to bigotry" and that they also pass on a message to "question authority and... not assume that the establishment or the press tells you all of the truth".[53]

Development history
Main article: Harry Potter influences and analogues
In 1990, Rowling was on a crowded train from Manchester to London when the idea for Harry suddenly "fell into" her head. Rowling gives an account of the experience on her website saying:[54]

I had been writing almost continuously since the age of six but I had never been so excited about an idea before. I simply sat and thought, for four (delayed train) hours, and all the details bubbled up in my brain, and this scrawny, black-haired, bespectacled boy who did not know he was a wizard became more and more real to me.

Rowling completed Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone in 1995 and the manuscript was sent off to several prospective agents.[55] The second agent she tried, Christopher Little, offered to represent her and sent the manuscript to several publishers.[56]

Publishing history

The logo used in British, Australian, and Canadian editions before 2010, which uses the typeface Cochin Bold[57]
After twelve other publishers had rejected Philosopher's Stone, Bloomsbury agreed to publish the book.[58] Despite Rowling's statement that she did not have any particular age group in mind when beginning to write the Harry Potter books, the publishers initially targeted children aged nine to eleven.[59] On the eve of publishing, Rowling was asked by her publishers to adopt a more gender-neutral pen name in order to appeal to the male members of this age group, fearing that they would not be interested in reading a novel they knew to be written by a woman. She elected to use J. K. Rowling (Joanne Kathleen Rowling), using her grandmother's name as her second name because she has no middle name.[60][61]

Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was published by Bloomsbury, the publisher of all Harry Potter books in the United Kingdom, on 26 June 1997.[62] It was released in the United States on 1 September 1998 by Scholastic—the American publisher of the books—as Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone,[63] after the American rights sold for US$105,000—a record amount for a children's book by an unknown author.[64] Scholastic feared that American readers would not associate the word "philosopher" with magic, and Rowling suggested the title Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone for the American market.[65] Rowling has later said that she regrets the change.[66]

The second book, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998 and in the US on 2 June 1999. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999 and in the US on 8 September 1999.[67] Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic.[68] Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series, at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version.[69] It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003.[70] Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was published on 16 July 2005.[71][72] The seventh and final novel, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, was published on 21 July 2007.[73] Rowling herself has stated that the last chapter of the final book (in fact, the epilogue) was completed "in something like 1990".[74]

Rowling retained rights to digital editions and released them on the Pottermore website in 2012. Vendors such as Amazon displayed the ebooks in the form of links to Pottermore, which controlled pricing.[75] All seven Harry Potter novels have been released in unabridged audiobook versions, with Stephen Fry reading the British editions and Jim Dale voicing the series for the American editions.[76][77] On Audible, the series has been listened, as of November 2022, for over a billion hours.[78]

Translations
Main article: Harry Potter in translation

The Russian translation of The Deathly Hallows goes on sale in Moscow, 2007
The series has been translated into more than 80 languages,[79] placing Rowling among the most translated authors in history. The books have seen translations to diverse languages such as Korean, Armenian, Ukrainian, Arabic, Urdu, Hindi, Bengali, Bulgarian, Welsh, Afrikaans, Albanian, Latvian, Vietnamese and Hawaiian. The first volume has been translated into Latin and even Ancient Greek,[80] making it the longest published work in Ancient Greek since the novels of Heliodorus of Emesa in the 3rd century AD.[81] The second volume has also been translated into Latin.[82]

Some of the translators hired to work on the books were well-known authors before their work on Harry Potter, such as Viktor Golyshev, who oversaw the Russian translation of the series' fifth book. The Turkish translation of books two to seven was undertaken by Sevin Okyay, a popular literary critic and cultural commentator.[83] For reasons of secrecy, translation on a given book could only start after it had been released in English, leading to a lag of several months before the translations were available. This led to more and more copies of the English editions being sold to impatient fans in non-English speaking countries; for example, such was the clamour to read Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix that its English language edition became the first English-language book ever to top the best-seller list in France.[84]

The United States editions were adapted into American English to make them more understandable to a young American audience.[85]

Cover art
For cover art, Bloomsbury chose painted art in a classic style of design, with the first cover a watercolour and pencil drawing by illustrator Thomas Taylor showing Harry boarding the Hogwarts Express, and a title in the font Cochin Bold.[86] The first releases of the successive books in the series followed in the same style but somewhat more realistic, illustrating scenes from the books. These covers were created by first Cliff Wright and then Jason Cockroft.[87]

Due to the appeal of the books among an adult audience, Bloomsbury commissioned a second line of editions in an 'adult' style. These initially used black-and-white photographic art for the covers showing objects from the books (including a very American Hogwarts Express) without depicting people, but later shifted to partial colourisation with a picture of Slytherin's locket on the cover of the final book.[citation needed]

International and later editions have been created by a range of designers, including Mary GrandPré for US audiences and Mika Launis in Finland.[88][89] For a later American release, Kazu Kibuishi created covers in a somewhat anime-influenced style.[90][91]

Reception
Commercial success
See also: List of best-selling books
A large crowd of fans wait outside of a Borders store in Delaware, waiting for the release of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
Crowd outside a book store for the midnight release of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
The popularity of the Harry Potter series has translated into substantial financial success for Rowling, her publishers, and other Harry Potter related license holders. This success has made Rowling the first and thus far only billionaire author.[92] The books have sold more than 600 million copies worldwide and have also given rise to the popular film adaptations produced by Warner Bros. Pictures, all of which have been highly successful in their own right.[93][79] The total revenue from the book sales is estimated, as of November 2018, to be around $7.7 billion.[94] The first novel in the series, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, has sold in excess of 120 million copies, making it one of the bestselling books in history.[95][96] The films have in turn spawned eight video games and have led to the licensing of more than 400 additional Harry Potter products. The Harry Potter brand has been estimated to be worth as much as $25 billion.[6]

The great demand for Harry Potter novels motivated The New York Times to create a separate best-seller list for children's literature in 2000, just before the release of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. By 24 June 2000, Rowling's novels had been on the list for 79 straight weeks; the first three novels were each on the hardcover best-seller list.[97] On 12 April 2007, Barnes & Noble declared that Deathly Hallows had broken its pre-order record, with more than 500,000 copies pre-ordered through its site.[98] For the release of Goblet of Fire, 9,000 FedEx trucks were used with no other purpose than to deliver the book.[99] Together, Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble pre-sold more than 700,000 copies of the book.[99] In the United States, the book's initial printing run was 3.8 million copies.[99] This record statistic was broken by Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, with 8.5 million, which was then shattered by Half-Blood Prince with 10.8 million copies.[100] Within the first 24 hours of its release, 6.9 million copies of Prince were sold in the US; in the UK more than two million copies were sold on the first day.[101] The initial US print run for Deathly Hallows was 12 million copies, and more than a million were pre-ordered through Amazon and Barnes & Noble.[102]

Fans of the series were so eager for the latest instalment that bookstores around the world began holding events to coincide with the midnight release of the books, beginning with the 2000 publication of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. The events, commonly featuring mock sorting, games, face painting, and other live entertainment have achieved popularity with Potter fans and have been highly successful in attracting fans and selling books with nearly nine million of the 10.8 million initial print copies of Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince sold in the first 24 hours.[103][104] The final book in the series, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows became the fastest selling book in history, moving 11 million units in the first twenty-four hours of release.[105] The book sold 2.7 million copies in the UK and 8.3 million in the US.[72] The series has also gathered adult fans, leading to the release of two editions of each Harry Potter book, identical in text but with one edition's cover artwork aimed at children and the other aimed at adults.[106]

Book	Sales[107]
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone	120 million
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets	77 million
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban	65 million
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire	65 million
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix	65 million
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince	65 million
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows	65 million
Literary criticism
Early in its history, Harry Potter received positive reviews. On publication, the first book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, attracted attention from the Scottish newspapers, such as The Scotsman, which said it had "all the makings of a classic",[108] and The Glasgow Herald, which called it "Magic stuff".[108] Soon the English newspapers joined in, with The Sunday Times comparing it to Roald Dahl's work ("comparisons to Dahl are, this time, justified"),[108] while The Guardian called it "a richly textured novel given lift-off by an inventive wit".[108]

By the time of the release of the fifth book, Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, the books began to receive strong criticism from a number of literary scholars. Yale professor, literary scholar, and critic Harold Bloom raised criticisms of the books' literary merits, saying, "Rowling's mind is so governed by clichés and dead metaphors that she has no other style of writing."[109] A. S. Byatt authored an op-ed article in The New York Times calling Rowling's universe a "secondary secondary world, made up of intelligently patchworked derivative motifs from all sorts of children's literature ... written for people whose imaginative lives are confined to TV cartoons, and the exaggerated (more exciting, not threatening) mirror-worlds of soaps, reality TV and celebrity gossip."[110]

Michael Rosen, a novelist and poet, held the opinion that the books were not suited for children, as they would be unable to grasp the complex themes. Rosen also stated that "J. K. Rowling is more of an adult writer."[111] The critic Anthony Holden wrote in The Observer on his experience of judging Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban for the 1999 Whitbread Awards. His overall view of the series was negative—"the Potter saga was essentially patronising, conservative, highly derivative, dispiritingly nostalgic for a bygone Britain", and he speaks of "a pedestrian, ungrammatical prose style".[112] Ursula K. Le Guin said, "I have no great opinion of it [...] it seemed a lively kid's fantasy crossed with a 'school novel,' good fare for its age group, but stylistically ordinary, imaginatively derivative, and ethically rather mean-spirited."[113] By contrast, author Fay Weldon, while admitting that the series is "not what the poets hoped for", nevertheless goes on to say, "but this is not poetry, it is readable, saleable, everyday, useful prose".[114]

The literary critic A. N. Wilson praised the Harry Potter series in The Times, stating, "There are not many writers who have JK's Dickensian ability to make us turn the pages, to weep—openly, with tears splashing—and a few pages later to laugh, at invariably good jokes ... We have lived through a decade in which we have followed the publication of the liveliest, funniest, scariest and most moving children's stories ever written."[115] Charles Taylor of Salon.com, who is primarily a movie critic,[116] took issue with Byatt's criticisms in particular. While he conceded that she may have "a valid cultural point—a teeny one—about the impulses that drive us to reassuring pop trash and away from the troubling complexities of art",[117] he rejected her claims that the series is lacking in serious literary merit and that it owes its success merely to the childhood reassurances it offers.[117] Stephen King called the series "a feat of which only a superior imagination is capable", and declared "Rowling's punning, one-eyebrow-cocked sense of humor" to be "remarkable". However, he wrote that he is "a little tired of discovering Harry at home with his horrible aunt and uncle", the formulaic beginning of all seven books.[8][118]

Sameer Rahim of The Daily Telegraph disagreed, saying "It depresses me to see 16- and 17-year-olds reading the series when they could be reading the great novels of childhood such as Oliver Twist or A House for Mr Biswas."[119] The Washington Post book critic Ron Charles opined in July 2007 that "through no fault of Rowling's", the cultural and marketing "hysteria" marked by the publication of the later books "trains children and adults to expect the roar of the coliseum, a mass-media experience that no other novel can possibly provide".[120] Jenny Sawyer wrote in The Christian Science Monitor on 25 July 2007 that Harry Potter neither faces a "moral struggle" nor undergoes any ethical growth and is thus "no guide in circumstances in which right and wrong are anything less than black and white".[121] In contrast Emily Griesinger described Harry's first passage through to Platform 9+3⁄4 as an application of faith and hope, and his encounter with the Sorting Hat as the first of many in which Harry is shaped by the choices he makes.[122]

In an 8 November 2002, Slate article, Chris Suellentrop likened Potter to a "trust-fund kid whose success at school is largely attributable to the gifts his friends and relatives lavish upon him".[123] In a 12 August 2007 review of Deathly Hallows in The New York Times, however, Christopher Hitchens praised Rowling for "unmooring" her "English school story" from literary precedents "bound up with dreams of wealth and class and snobbery", arguing that she had instead created "a world of youthful democracy and diversity".[124] In 2016, an article written by Diana C. Mutz compared the politics of Harry Potter to the 2016 Donald Trump presidential campaign. She suggests that these themes are also present in the presidential election and it may play a significant role in how Americans have responded to the campaign.[125]

There is ongoing discussion regarding the extent to which the series was inspired by Tolkien's Lord of the Rings books.[126]

Thematic critique
The portrayal of women in Harry Potter has been described as complex and varied, but nonetheless conforming to stereotypical and patriarchal depictions of gender.[127] Gender divides are ostensibly absent in the books: Hogwarts is coeducational and women hold positions of power in wizarding society. However, this setting obscures the typecasting of female characters and the general depiction of conventional gender roles.[128] According to scholars Elizabeth Heilman and Trevor Donaldson, the subordination of female characters goes further early in the series. The final three books "showcase richer roles and more powerful females": for instance, the series' "most matriarchal character", Molly Weasley, engages substantially in the final battle of Deathly Hallows, while other women are shown as leaders.[129] Hermione Granger, in particular, becomes an active and independent character essential to the protagonists' battle against evil.[130] Yet, even particularly capable female characters such as Hermione and Minerva McGonagall are placed in supporting roles,[131] and Hermione's status as a feminist model is debated.[132] Girls and women are more frequently shown as emotional, more often defined by their appearance, and less often given agency in family settings.[128][133]

The social hierarchy of wizards in Rowling's world has drawn debate among critics. "Purebloods" have two wizard parents; "half-bloods" have one; and "Muggle-born" wizards have magical abilities, although neither of their parents is a wizard.[134] Lord Voldemort and his followers believe that blood purity is paramount and that Muggles are subhuman.[135] According to the literary scholar Andrew Blake, Harry Potter rejects blood purity as a basis for social division;[136] Suman Gupta agrees that Voldemort's philosophy represents "absolute evil";[137] and Nel and Eccleshare agree that advocates of racial or blood-based hierarchies are antagonists.[138][139] Gupta, following Blake,[140] suggests that the essential superiority of wizards over Muggles—wizards can use magic and Muggles cannot—means that the books cannot coherently reject anti-Muggle prejudice by appealing to equality between wizards and Muggles. Rather, according to Gupta, Harry Potter models a form of tolerance based on the "charity and altruism of those belonging to superior races" towards lesser races.[141]

Harry Potter's's depiction of race, specifically the slavery of house-elves, has received varied responses. Scholars such as Brycchan Carey have praised the books' abolitionist sentiments, viewing Hermione's Society for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare as a model for younger readers' political engagement.[142][143] Other critics including Farah Mendlesohn find the portrayal of house-elves "most difficult to accept": the elves are denied the right to free themselves and rely on the benevolence of others like Hermione.[144][145] Pharr terms the house-elves a disharmonious element in the series, writing that Rowling leaves their fate hanging;[146] at the end of Deathly Hallows, the elves remain enslaved and cheerful.[147] The goblins of the world of Harry Potter have also received criticism for following antisemitic caricatures – particularly for their grotesque "hook-nosed" portrayal in the films, an appearance associated with Jewish stereotypes.[148][149][150]

Controversies
Main articles: Legal disputes over the Harry Potter series, Religious debates over the Harry Potter series, Politics of Harry Potter, and Tanya Grotter
The books have been the subject of a number of legal proceedings, stemming from various conflicts over copyright and trademark infringements. The popularity and high market value of the series has led Rowling, her publishers, and film distributor Warner Bros. to take legal measures to protect their copyright, which have included banning the sale of Harry Potter imitations, targeting the owners of websites over the "Harry Potter" domain name, and suing author Nancy Stouffer to counter her accusations that Rowling had plagiarised her work.[151][152][153]

Various religious fundamentalists have claimed that the books promote witchcraft and religions such as Wicca and are therefore unsuitable for children,[154][155][156] while a number of critics have criticised the books for promoting various political agendas.[157][158] The series has landed the American Library Associations' Top 10 Banned Book List in 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2019 with claims it was anti-family, discussed magic and witchcraft, contained actual spells and curses, referenced the occult/Satanism, violence, and had characters who used "nefarious means" to attain goals, as well as conflicts with religious viewpoints.[159]

The books also aroused controversies in the literary and publishing worlds. From 1997 to 1998, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone won almost all the United Kingdom awards judged by children, but none of the children's book awards judged by adults,[160] and Sandra Beckett suggested the reason was intellectual snobbery towards books that were popular among children.[161] In 1999, the winner of the Whitbread Book of the Year award children's division was entered for the first time on the shortlist for the main award, and one judge threatened to resign if Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was declared the overall winner; it finished second, very close behind the winner of the poetry prize, Seamus Heaney's translation of the Anglo-Saxon epic Beowulf.[161]

In 2000, shortly before the publication of Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, the previous three Harry Potter books topped The New York Times fiction best-seller list and a third of the entries were children's books. The newspaper created a new children's section covering children's books, including both fiction and non-fiction, and initially counting only hardback sales. The move was supported by publishers and booksellers.[97] In 2004, The New York Times further split the children's list, which was still dominated by Harry Potter books, into sections for series and individual books and removed the Harry Potter books from the section for individual books.[162] The split in 2000 attracted condemnation, praise and some comments that presented both benefits and disadvantages of the move.[163] Time suggested that, on the same principle, Billboard should have created a separate "mop-tops" list in 1964 when The Beatles held the top five places in its list, and Nielsen should have created a separate game-show list when Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? dominated the ratings.[164]

Legacy
Influence on literature
Sculpture of Harry Potter in Leicester Square, London, 2020
Sculpture of Harry Potter in Leicester Square, London
Harry Potter transformed children's literature.[165][166] In the 1970s, children's books were generally realistic as opposed to fantastic,[167] while adult fantasy became popular because of the influence of The Lord of the Rings.[168] The next decade saw an increasing interest in grim, realist themes, with an outflow of fantasy readers and writers to adult works.[169][170]

The commercial success of Harry Potter reversed this trend.[171] The scale of its growth had no precedent in the children's market: within four years of the series' inception, it occupied 28% of that field by revenue.[172] Children's literature rose in cultural status,[173] and fantasy became a dominant genre.[174] Older works in the genre, including Diana Wynne Jones's Chrestomanci series and Diane Duane's Young Wizards, were reprinted and rose in popularity; some authors re-established their careers.[175] In the following decades, many Harry Potter imitators and subversive responses grew popular.[176][177]

Rowling has been compared to Enid Blyton, who also wrote in simple language about groups of children and long held sway over the British children's market.[178][179] She has also been described as an heir to Roald Dahl.[180] Some critics view Harry Potter's rise, along with the concurrent success of Philip Pullman's His Dark Materials, as part of a broader shift in reading tastes: a rejection of literary fiction in favour of plot and adventure.[181] This is reflected in the BBC's 2003 "Big Read" survey of the UK's favourite books, where Pullman and Rowling ranked at numbers 3 and 5, respectively, with very few British literary classics in the top 10.[182]

Cultural impact
Further information: Harry Potter fandom

"Platform 9+3⁄4" sign on London King's Cross railway station
Harry Potter has been described as a cultural phenomenon.[183][184] The word "Muggle" has spread beyond its origins in the books, entering the Oxford English Dictionary in 2003.[185] A real-life version of the sport Quidditch was created in 2005 and featured as an exhibition tournament in the 2012 London Olympics.[186] Characters and elements from the series have inspired scientific names of several organisms, including the dinosaur Dracorex hogwartsia, the spider Eriovixia gryffindori, the wasp Ampulex dementor, and the crab Harryplax severus.[187]

Librarian Nancy Knapp pointed out the books' potential to improve literacy by motivating children to read much more than they otherwise would.[188] The seven-book series has a word count of 1,083,594 (US edition). Agreeing about the motivating effects, Diane Penrod also praised the books' blending of simple entertainment with "the qualities of highbrow literary fiction", but expressed concern about the distracting effect of the prolific merchandise that accompanies the book launches.[189] However, the assumption that Harry Potter books have increased literacy among young people is "largely a folk legend".[190]

Research by the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) has found no increase in reading among children coinciding with the Harry Potter publishing phenomenon, nor has the broader downward trend in reading among Americans been arrested during the rise in the popularity of the Harry Potter books.[190][191] The research also found that children who read Harry Potter books were not more likely to go on to read outside the fantasy and mystery genres.[190] NEA chairman Dana Gioia said the series, "got millions of kids to read a long and reasonably complex series of books. The trouble is that one Harry Potter novel every few years is not enough to reverse the decline in reading."[192]

Many fan fiction and fan art works about Harry Potter have been made. In March 2007, "Harry Potter" was the most commonly searched fan fiction subject on the internet.[193] Jennifer Conn used Snape's and Quidditch coach Madam Hooch's teaching methods as examples of what to avoid and what to emulate in clinical teaching,[194] and Joyce Fields wrote that the books illustrate four of the five main topics in a typical first-year sociology class: "sociological concepts including culture, society, and socialisation; stratification and social inequality; social institutions; and social theory".[195]

From the early 2000s onwards, several news reports appeared in the UK of the Harry Potter book and movie series driving demand for pet owls,[196] and even reports that after the end of the movie series these same pet owls were now being abandoned by their owners.[197] This led J. K. Rowling to issue several statements urging Harry Potter fans to refrain from purchasing pet owls.[198] Despite the media flurry, research into the popularity of Harry Potter and sales of owls in the UK failed to find any evidence that the Harry Potter franchise had influenced the buying of owls in the country or the number of owls reaching animal shelters and sanctuaries.[199]

By 2003, a sign marking Platform 9 3/4 was put up at the London King's Cross railway station,[200][201][202] with a trolley fixed to the wall added by the year 2005.[203][204] The location of the trolley moved after renovations, and a Harry Potter-themed shop opened nearby in 2012.[205][206][207] Prince Charles visited the location in 2013.[208]

September 1, the day Harry Potter generally started school at Hogwarts, became known to fans as "Back to Hogwarts Day",[209][210] gaining more prominence starting in 2015 when J.K. Rowling suggested on social media that it was the year Harry Potter would be starting to send of off his own children to Hogwarts, though in 2016 she later acknowledged that she was wrong by a year regarding the King's Cross events in the epilogue.[211][212][213] On the date in 2024, fans showed up at King's Cross Station even though no event was held and fans were discouraged from attending, reportedly due to crowding issues the year before, and booed when no Hogwarts Express announcement was made at 11 a.m. as in previous years.[214][215] Organizers had encouraged fans to participate in virtual events, while in-person events were held at other locations like Grand Central Terminal in New York City and Hamburg, Germany.[216][217][218]

British book publisher Bloomsbury announced the launch of "Harry Potter Book Night" and associated promotional events in 2014, first held in February 2015.[219][220][221] In 2023, the event was rebranded to "Harry Book Book Day" and moved to October.[222][223]

Awards, honours, and recognition
Further information: List of awards and nominations received by J. K. Rowling
The Harry Potter series has been recognised by a host of awards since the initial publication of Philosopher's Stone, including a platinum award from the Whitaker Gold and Platinum Book Awards (2001),[224][225] three Nestlé Smarties Book Prizes (1997–1999),[226] two Scottish Arts Council Book Awards (1999 and 2001),[227] the inaugural Whitbread children's book of the year award (1999),[228] and the WHSmith book of the year (2006),[229] among others. In 2000, Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was nominated for a Hugo Award for Best Novel, and in 2001, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire won said award.[230] Honours include a commendation for the Carnegie Medal (1997),[231] a short listing for the Guardian Children's Award (1998), and numerous listings on the notable books, editors' choices, and best books lists of the American Library Association, The New York Times, Chicago Public Library, and Publishers Weekly.[232]

In 2002, sociologist Andrew Blake named Harry Potter a British pop culture icon along with the likes of James Bond and Sherlock Holmes.[233] In 2003, four of the books were named in the top 24 of the BBC's The Big Read survey of the best loved novels in the UK.[234] A 2004 study found that books in the series were commonly read aloud in elementary schools in San Diego County, California.[235] Based on a 2007 online poll, the US National Education Association listed the series in its "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children".[236] Time magazine named Rowling as a runner-up for its 2007 Person of the Year award, noting the social, moral, and political inspiration she has given her fandom.[237] Three of the books placed among the "Top 100 Chapter Books" of all time, or children's novels, in a 2012 survey published by School Library Journal: Sorcerer's Stone ranked number three, Prisoner of Azkaban 12th, and Goblet of Fire 98th.[238]

In 2007, the seven Harry Potter book covers were depicted on a series of UK postage stamps issued by Royal Mail.[239] In 2012, the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London featured a 100-foot tall rendition of Lord Voldemort in a segment designed to showcase the UK's cultural icons.[240] In November 2019, the BBC listed the Harry Potter series on its list of the 100 most influential novels.[241]

Adaptations
Further information: Wizarding World
Films
Main article: Harry Potter (film series)
The red locomotive train used as the "Hogwarts Express" in the film series. In the front it has the numbers "5912" inscripted on it
The locomotive that features as the "Hogwarts Express" in the film series
In 1999, Rowling sold the film rights for Harry Potter to Warner Bros. for a reported £1 million (US$2,000,000).[242][243] Rowling had creative control on the film series, observing the filmmaking process of Philosopher's Stone and serving as producer on the two-part Deathly Hallows, alongside David Heyman and David Barron.[244] Rowling demanded the principal cast be kept strictly British and Irish, nonetheless allowing for the inclusion or French and Eastern European actors where characters from the book are specified as such.[245]

Chris Columbus was selected as the director for Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (titled "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" in the United States).[246] Philosopher's Stone was released on 14 November 2001. Just three days after the film's release, production for Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, also directed by Columbus, began and the film was released on 15 November 2002.[247] Columbus declined to direct Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban, only acting as producer. Mexican director Alfonso Cuarón took over the job, and after shooting in 2003, the film was released on 4 June 2004. Due to the fourth film beginning its production before the third's release, Mike Newell was chosen as the director for Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, released on 18 November 2005.[248] Newell became the first British director of the series, with television director David Yates following suit after he was chosen to helm Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. Production began in January 2006 and the film was released the following year in July 2007.[249] Yates was selected to direct Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, which was released on 15 July 2009.[250][251] The final instalment in the series, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was released in two cinematic parts: Part 1 on 19 November 2010 and Part 2 on 15 July 2011.[252][253]

Spin-off prequels
Main article: Fantastic Beasts (film series)
A prequel series is planned to consist of five films, taking place before the main series.[254] The first film Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them was released in November 2016, followed by the second Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald in November 2018 and Fantastic Beasts: The Secrets of Dumbledore in April 2022. Rowling wrote the screenplays for all three films,[255] marking her foray into screenwriting.

Games
See also: Harry Potter video games
A number of non-interactive media games and board games have been released such as Cluedo Harry Potter Edition, Scene It? Harry Potter and Lego Harry Potter models, which are influenced by the themes of both the novels and films.

There are fourteen Harry Potter video games, eight corresponding with the films and books and six spin-offs. The film/book-based games are produced by Electronic Arts (EA), as was Harry Potter: Quidditch World Cup, with the game version of the first entry in the series, Philosopher's Stone, being released in November 2001. Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone went on to become one of the best-selling PlayStation games ever.[256] The video games were released to coincide with the films. Objectives usually occur in and around Hogwarts. The story and design of the games follow the selected film's characterisation and plot; EA worked closely with Warner Bros. to include scenes from the films. The last game in the series, Deathly Hallows, was split, with Part 1 released in November 2010 and Part 2 debuting on consoles in July 2011.[257][258]

The spin-off games Lego Harry Potter: Years 1–4 and Lego Harry Potter: Years 5–7 were developed by Traveller's Tales and published by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment. The spin-off games Book of Spells and Book of Potions were developed by London Studio and use the Wonderbook, an augmented reality book designed to be used in conjunction with the PlayStation Move and PlayStation Eye.[259] The Harry Potter universe, the Wizarding World, is also featured in Lego Dimensions, with the settings and side characters featured in the Harry Potter Adventure World, and Harry, Voldemort, and Hermione as playable characters. In 2017, Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment opened its own Harry Potter-themed game design studio, by the name of Portkey Games, before releasing Hogwarts Mystery, developed by Jam City, in 2018 and Hogwarts Legacy, developed by Avalanche Software, in 2023.[260][261]

Stage production
Main article: Harry Potter and the Cursed Child

Harry Potter and the Cursed Child playing at the West End's Palace Theatre
Harry Potter and the Cursed Child: Parts I and II is a play which serves as a sequel to the books, beginning nineteen years after the events of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. It was written by Jack Thorne based on an original new story by Thorne, Rowling and John Tiffany.[262] It has run at the Palace Theatre in London's West End since previews began on 7 June 2016 with an official premiere on 30 June 2016.[263] The first four months of tickets for the June–September performances were sold out within several hours upon release.[264] Forthcoming productions are planned for Broadway[265] and Melbourne.[266]

The script was released as a book at the time of the premiere, with a revised version following the next year.

Television
On 25 January 2021, it was reported that a live-action television series has been in early development at HBO Max. Though it was noted that the series has "complicated rights issues", due to a seven-year rights deal with Warner Bros. Domestic TV Distribution that included US broadcast, cable and streaming rights to the franchise, which ends in April 2025.[267] On 12 April 2023, the series was confirmed to be in development, and will be streamed on the new streaming service Max (formerly known as HBO Max).[268][269][270] On 23 February 2024, Warner Bros. Discovery CEO David Zaslav announced that the series would debut on Max in 2026. On 25 June 2024, it was announced the series was moved from Max to HBO.[271] The series is planned to adapt one book per season, with seven seasons planned.[272] An open casting call for the three leading young actors in the U.K. and Ireland was announced in September 2024, with Variety reporting that 32 000 children auditioned for the roles, with filming to start in summer 2025.[273][274][275] In November 2024, it was reported that Mark Rylance was the front runner to play Dumbledore in the series.[276] On 25 February 2025, American actor John Lithgow confirmed reports that he had been cast as Dumbledore in the series.[277][278] He acknowledged there would be controversy over him playing the role as an American, when the film series only cast British or Irish cast members at Rowling's request, and that he would work with a dialect coach. He also suggested filming would start in August after he finished portraying Roald Dahl on stage in London.[279] He said "I don't know the Harry Potter canon by heart as 98% of the world's population seems to," but said that in talks with the producers he was intrigued by how "as the kids grew older [in the books], you learn more and more about Dumbledore, and he became a much more surprising, complicated character."[280] He also said he had started reading the books in preparation.[281] News reports also speculated in March 2025 that a casting notice seeking children as extras near Warner Bros. Studios Leavesden was for the new series.[282][283] On 7 March 2025, it was reported that English actor Paapa Essiedu and English actress Janet McTeer were in negotiations to portray Severus Snape and Minerva McGonagall respectively in the series.[284]

Attractions
Main articles: The Wizarding World of Harry Potter and Warner Bros. Studio Tour London – The Making of Harry Potter

Hogwarts Castle as depicted in the Wizarding World of Harry Potter, located in Universal Orlando Resort's Island of Adventure
Universal and Warner Brothers created The Wizarding World of Harry Potter, a Harry Potter-themed expansion to the Islands of Adventure theme park at Universal Orlando Resort in Florida. It opened to the public on 18 June 2010.[285] It includes a recreation of Hogsmeade and several rides; its flagship attraction is Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey, which exists within a recreation of Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry.[286]

In 2014 Universal opened a Harry Potter-themed area at the Universal Studios Florida theme park. It includes a recreation of Diagon Alley.[287] The flagship attraction is the Harry Potter and the Escape from Gringotts roller coaster ride.[288] A completely functioning full-scale replica of the Hogwarts Express was created for the Diagon Alley expansion, connecting King's Cross Station at Universal Studios to the Hogsmeade station at Islands of Adventure.[289][290] The Wizarding World of Harry Potter opened at the Universal Studios Hollywood theme park near Los Angeles, California in 2016,[291][292] and in Universal Studios Japan theme park in Osaka, Japan in 2014. The Osaka venue includes the village of Hogsmeade, Harry Potter and the Forbidden Journey ride, and Flight of the Hippogriff roller coaster.[293][294] Other Harry Potter roller coasters are the Dragon Challenge which closed to make way for Hagrid's Magical Creatures Motorbike Adventure, at Universal Islands of Adventure.

Warner Bros. Studio Tour London – The Making of Harry Potter is a behind-the-scenes walking tour in London featuring authentic sets, costumes and props from the film series. The attraction is located at Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden, where all eight of the Harry Potter films were made. Warner Bros. constructed two new sound stages to house and showcase the sets from each of the British-made productions, following a £100 million investment.[295] It opened to the public in March 2012.[296] A Japan based version of the studio tour was announced in August 2020 and opened on June 16, 2023,[297]

Supplementary works
See also: J. K. Rowling § Philanthropy
Rowling expanded the Harry Potter universe with short books produced for charities.[298][299] In 2001, she released Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them (a purported Hogwarts textbook) and Quidditch Through the Ages (a book Harry reads for fun). Proceeds from the sale of these two books benefited the charity Comic Relief.[300] In 2007, Rowling composed seven handwritten copies of The Tales of Beedle the Bard, a collection of fairy tales that is featured in the final novel, one of which was auctioned to raise money for the Children's High Level Group, a fund for mentally disabled children in poor countries. The book was published internationally on 4 December 2008.[301][302] Rowling also wrote an 800-word prequel in 2008 as part of a fundraiser organised by the bookseller Waterstones.[303] All three of these books contain extra information about the wizarding world not included in the original novels.

In 2016, she released three new e-books: Hogwarts: An Incomplete and Unreliable Guide, Short Stories from Hogwarts of Power, Politics and Pesky Poltergeists and Short Stories from Hogwarts of Heroism, Hardship and Dangerous Hobbies.[304]

Rowling's website Pottermore was launched in 2012.[305] Pottermore allows users to be sorted, be chosen by their wand and play various minigames. The main purpose of the website was to allow the user to journey through the story with access to content not revealed by JK Rowling previously, with over 18,000 words of additional content.[306] The site was redesigned in 2015 as WizardingWorld and it mainly focuses on the information already available, rather than exploration.[307]

See also
icon	TV portal
Mary Poppins
The Worst Witch
References
 Sources that refer to the many genres, cultural meanings and references of the series include:
Fry, Stephen (10 December 2005). "Living with Harry Potter". BBC Radio 4. Archived from the original on 21 October 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2005.
Jensen, Jeff (7 September 2000). "Why J.K. Rowling waited to read Harry Potter to her daughter". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2015.
Nancy Carpentier Brown (2007). "The Last Chapter" (PDF). Our Sunday Visitor. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 28 April 2009.
J. K. Rowling. "J. K. Rowling at the Edinburgh Book Festival". Archived from the original on 20 August 2006. Retrieved 10 October 2006.
 Greig, Geordie (11 January 2006). "There would be so much to tell her..." The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2007.
 Allsobrook, 'Marian (18 June 2003). "Potter's place in the literary canon". BBC News. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2007.
 Bartlett, Kellie (6 January 2005). "Harry Potter's place in literature". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2023.
 "Best-selling book series for children". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 22 January 2025.
 Meyer, Katie (6 April 2016). "Harry Potter's $25 Billion Magic Spell". Money. Archived from the original on 14 May 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2016.
 Anne Le Lievre, Kerrie (2003). "Wizards and wainscots: generic structures and genre themes in the Harry Potter series". CNET Networks. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008.
 King, Stephen (23 July 2000). "Wild About Harry". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 9 August 2010. ...the Harry Potter books are, at heart, satisfyingly shrewd mystery tales.
 "Harry Potter makes boarding fashionable". BBC News. 13 December 1999. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008.
 Ellen Jones, Leslie (2003). JRR Tolkien: A Biography. Greenwood Press. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-313-32340-9.
 A Whited, Lana (2004). The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Literary Phenomenon. University of Missouri Press. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-8262-1549-9.
 Natov 2002, p. 129.
 Butler 2012, pp. 233–34.
 Butler 2012, p. 234.
 Park 2003, p. 183.
 Natov 2002, p. 130.
 Nikolajeva 2008, p. 233.
 Ostry 2003, p. 97.
 Ostry 2003, pp. 90, 97–98.
 Grossman, Lev (28 June 2007). "Harry Potter's Last Adventure". Time. Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Retrieved 1 September 2008.
 "Two characters to die in last 'Harry Potter' book: J.K. Rowling". CBC. 26 June 2006. Archived from the original on 30 June 2006. Retrieved 1 September 2008.
 Alton 2008, p. 216.
 Gallardo & Smith 2003, p. 195.
 Arden, Heather; Lorenz, Kathryn (June 2003). "The Harry Potter Stories and French Arthurian Romance". Arthuriana. 13 (12): 54–68. doi:10.1353/art.2003.0005. ISSN 1078-6279. JSTOR 27870516. S2CID 161603742.
 Singer 2016, pp. 26–27.
 Farmer 2001, p. 58.
 Farmer 2001, p. 55.
 Nikolajeva 2008, pp. 238–39.
 Adler, Shawn (17 October 2007). "'Harry Potter' Author J.K. Rowling Opens Up About Books' Christian Imagery". MTV. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2018.
 Sedlmayr, Gerold; Waller, Nicole (28 October 2014). Politics in Fantasy Media: Essays on Ideology and Gender in Fiction, Film, Television and Games. McFarland & Company. p. 132. ISBN 9781476617558. During this press conference, Rowling stated that the Bible quotations in that novel "almost epitomize the whole series. I think they sum up all the themes in the whole series" (reported in Adler).
 Falconer, Rachel (21 October 2008). The Crossover Novel: Contemporary Children's Fiction and Its Adult Readership. Routledge. p. 69. ISBN 9781135865016. These New Testament verses (Matthew 6:19 and 1 Corinthians 15:26) together denote the promise of resurrection through the Son of God's consent to die.52 In interview, Rowling has stressed that these two quotations 'sum up – they almost epitomize the whole series'.
 Cooke, Rachel. "ProQuest Ebook Central". The Charleston Advisor. doi:10.5260/cca.199425 (inactive 1 November 2024). (subscription required)
 Ciaccio 2008, pp. 39–40.
 Groves 2017, pp. xxi–xxii, 135–136.
 Natov 2002, pp. 134–36.
 Taub & Servaty-Seib 2008, pp. 23–27.
 Pharr 2016, pp. 20–21.
 Los 2008, pp. 32–33.
 Stojilkov 2015, p. 135.
 Pharr 2016, pp. 14–15, 20–21.
 Groves 2017, p. 138.
 Groves 2017, p. 135.
 Shanoes 2003, pp. 131–32.
 McEvoy 2016, p. 207.
 Doughty 2002, pp. 247–49.
 Berberich 2016, p. 153.
 Birch 2008, pp. 110–13.
 Nikolajeva 2016, p. 204.
 Applebaum 2008, pp. 84–85.
 Max, Wyman (26 October 2000). ""You can lead a fool to a book but you cannot make them think": Author has frank words for the religious right". The Vancouver Sun. p. A3. ProQuest 242655908.
 Greenwald, Janey; Greenwald, J (Fall 2005). "Understanding Harry Potter: Parallels to the Deaf World" (Free full text). The Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education. 10 (4): 442–450. doi:10.1093/deafed/eni041. PMID 16000691.
 Duffy, Edward (2002). "Sentences in Harry Potter, Students in Future Writing Classes". Rhetoric Review. 21 (2): 177. doi:10.1207/S15327981RR2102_03. S2CID 144654506.
 "JK Rowling outs Dumbledore as gay". BBC News. 21 October 2007. Archived from the original on 22 October 2007. Retrieved 21 October 2007.
 Rowling, JK (2006). "Biography". JKRowling.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2006. Retrieved 21 May 2006.
 Kirk 2003, p. 73.
 Smith 2002, pp. 156, 159–161.
 "Harry Potter Books (UK Editions) Terms and Conditions for Use of Images for Book Promotion" (PDF). Bloomsbury Publishing Plc. 10 July 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 July 2007. Retrieved 7 September 2012.
 Smith 2002, pp. 159–160.
 Huler, Scott. "The magic years". The News & Observer. Archived from the original on 18 December 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 Kirk 2003, p. 76.
 Savill, Richard (21 June 2001). "Harry Potter and the mystery of J K's lost initial". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone". Bloomsbury Publishing. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2016.
 "Wild about Harry". 2 July 2007. Archived from the original on 21 August 2009. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 Rozhon, Tracie (21 April 2007). "A Brief Walk Through Time at Scholastic". The New York Times. p. C3. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 21 April 2007.
 Errington 2017, p. 145.
 Whited 2015, pp. 75.
 "A Potter timeline for muggles". Toronto Star. 14 July 2007. Archived from the original on 20 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "Speed-reading after lights out". The Guardian. London. 19 July 2000. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 Harmon, Amy (14 July 2003). "Harry Potter and the Internet Pirates". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 April 2009. Retrieved 21 August 2008.
 Cassy, John (16 January 2003). "Harry Potter and the hottest day of summer". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "July date for Harry Potter book". BBC News. 21 December 2004. Archived from the original on 29 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "Harry Potter finale sales hit 11 m". BBC News. 23 July 2007. Archived from the original on 25 December 2008. Retrieved 21 August 2008.
 "Rowling unveils last Potter date". BBC News. 1 February 2007. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "Rowling to kill two in final book". BBC News. 27 June 2006. Archived from the original on 3 August 2009. Retrieved 25 July 2007.
 Clark & Phillips 2019, p. 47.
 Rich, Mokoto (17 July 2007). "The Voice of Harry Potter Can Keep a Secret". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 September 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2019.
 "Harry Potter Audiobooks and E-Books". Mugglenet. Dose Media. Archived from the original on 6 September 2019. Retrieved 6 September 2019.
 "Harry Potter: Fans have listened to books for one billion hours". BBC Newsround. 30 November 2022. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2023.
 "Scholastic Marks 25 Year Anniversary of The Publication of J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone" (Press release). New York, New York: Scholastic. 6 February 2023. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023.
 Wilson, Andrew (2006). "Harry Potter in Greek". Andrew Wilson. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2008.
 Castle, Tim (2 December 2004). "Harry Potter? It's All Greek to Me". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 28 July 2008.
 LTD, Skyron. "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (Latin)". Bloomsbury Publishing. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2015.
 Güler, Emrah (2005). "Not lost in translation: Harry Potter in Turkish". The Turkish Daily News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 9 May 2007.
 "OOTP is best seller in France—in English!". BBC News. 1 July 2003. Archived from the original on 13 June 2017. Retrieved 28 July 2008.
 "Differences in the UK and US Versions of Four Harry Potter Books". FAST US-1. 21 January 2008. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2008.
 Taylor, Thomas (26 July 2012). "Me and Harry Potter". Thomas Taylor (author site). Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2015.
 Thorpe, Vanessa (20 January 2002). "Harry Potter beats Austen in sale rooms". The Observer. Archived from the original on 13 June 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2010.
 Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows; American edition; Scholastic Corporation; 2007; Final credits page
 "Illustrator puts a bit of herself on Potter cover: GrandPré feels pressure to create something special with each book". Today.com. Associated Press. 8 March 2005. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 12 February 2007.
 Liu, Jonathan H. (13 February 2013). "New Harry Potter Covers by Kazu Kibuishi". Wired. Archived from the original on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2015.
 Hall, April (15 August 2014). "5 Questions With... Kazu Kibuishi (Amulet series)". www.reading.org. Archived from the original on 18 April 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2015.
 Watson, Julie (26 February 2004). "J. K. Rowling and the Billion-Dollar Empire". Forbes. Archived from the original on 11 December 2007. Retrieved 3 December 2007.
 "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Box Office Mojo. 1998–2008. Archived from the original on 3 November 2010. Retrieved 29 July 2008.
 "The Billion Dollar Business Behind 'Harry Potter' Franchise". entrepreneur. 18 November 2018. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 22 December 2020.
 Chalton, Nicola; Macardle, Meredith (15 March 2017). 20th Century in Bite-Sized Chunks. Book Sales. ISBN 978-0-7858-3510-3.
 "Burbank Public Library offering digital copies of first 'Harry Potter' novel to recognize the book's 20th anniversary". Burbank Leader. 5 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 October 2020. Retrieved 3 September 2020.
 Smith, Dinitia (24 June 2000). "The Times Plans a Children's Best-Seller List". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 June 2009. Retrieved 30 September 2008.
 "New Harry Potter breaks pre-order record". RTÉ.ie Entertainment. 13 April 2007. Archived from the original on 18 April 2007. Retrieved 23 April 2007.
 Fierman, Daniel (21 July 2000). "Wild About Harry". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 31 March 2007. Retrieved 26 October 2019. When I buy the books for my grandchildren, I have them all gift wrapped but one...that's for me. And I have not been 12 for over 50 years.
 "Harry Potter hits midnight frenzy". CNN. 15 July 2005. Archived from the original on 21 December 2006. Retrieved 15 January 2007.
 "Worksheet: Half-Blood Prince sets UK record". BBC News. 20 July 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2007.
 "Record print run for final Potter". BBC News. 15 March 2007. Archived from the original on 25 March 2007. Retrieved 22 May 2007.
 Freeman, Simon (18 July 2005). "Harry Potter casts spell at checkouts". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2008.
 "Potter book smashes sales records". BBC News. 18 July 2005. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 29 July 2008.
 "'Harry Potter' tale is fastest-selling book in history". The New York Times. 23 July 2007. Archived from the original on 8 December 2011. Retrieved 30 March 2010.
 "Harry Potter at Bloomsbury Publishing – Adult and Children Covers". Bloomsbury Publishing. Archived from the original on 28 August 2008. Retrieved 18 August 2008.
 "Harry Potter books stats and facts". WordsRated. 19 October 2021. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 11 June 2023.
 Eccleshare 2002, p. 10
 Bloom, Harold (24 September 2003). "Dumbing down American readers". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on 17 June 2006. Retrieved 20 June 2006.
 Byatt, A. S. (7 July 2003). "Harry Potter and the Childish Adult". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 1 August 2008.
 Sweeney, Charlene (19 May 2008). "Harry Potter 'is too boring and grown-up for young readers'". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2011.
 Holden, Anthony (25 June 2000). "Why Harry Potter does not cast a spell over me". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 1 August 2008.
 "Chronicles of Earthsea". The Guardian. London. 9 February 2004. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2009.
 Allison, Rebecca (11 July 2003). "Rowling books 'for people with stunted imaginations'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2008.
 Wilson, A. N. (29 July 2007). "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows by JK Rowling". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 6 July 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 "Salon Columnist". Salon.com. 2000. Archived from the original on 16 June 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008.
 Taylor, Charles (8 July 2003). "A. S. Byatt and the goblet of bile". Salon.com. Archived from the original on 16 June 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2008.
 Fox, Killian (31 December 2006). "JK Rowling: The mistress of all she surveys". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 10 February 2007.
 Rahim, Sameer (13 April 2012). "The Casual Vacancy: why I'm dreading JK Rowling's adult novel". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2017.
 Charles, Ron (15 July 2007). "Harry Potter and the Death of Reading". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 25 July 2008. Retrieved 16 April 2008.
 Sawyer, Jenny (25 July 2007). "Missing from 'Harry Potter" – a real moral struggle". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 16 April 2008.
 Griesinger, E. (2002). "Harry Potter and the "deeper magic": narrating hope in children's literature". Christianity and Literature. 51 (3): 455–480. doi:10.1177/014833310205100308.
 Suellentrop, Chris (8 November 2002). "Harry Potter: Fraud". Slate. Archived from the original on 27 March 2008. Retrieved 16 April 2008.
 Hitchens, Christopher (12 August 2007). "The Boy Who Lived". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2008.
 C. Mutz, Diana (2016). "Harry Potter and the Deathly Donald". Elections in Focus. 49. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2018.
 Wetherill, Louise. "Harry Potter: Merely Frodo Baggins with a Wand?", in Ampthill Literary Festival Yearbook 2015. Ampthill: Literary Festival Committee, 2015. ISBN 978-1-5175506-8-4, pp. 85–92.
 Heilman & Donaldson 2008, pp. 139–41; Pugh & Wallace 2006; Eberhardt 2017.
 Pugh & Wallace 2006.
 Heilman & Donaldson 2008, pp. 139–41.
 Berents 2012, pp. 144–49.
 Heilman & Donaldson 2008, pp. 142–47.
 Bell & Alexander 2012, pp. 1–8.
 Heilman & Donaldson 2008, pp. 149–55.
 Barratt 2012, p. 64.
 Barratt 2012, pp. 63, 67.
 Blake 2002, p. 103.
 Gupta 2009, p. 104.
 Nel 2001, p. 44.
 Eccleshare 2002, p. 78.
 Gupta 2009, p. 105.
 Gupta 2009, pp. 108–10.
 Carey 2003, pp. 105–107, 114.
 Horne 2010, p. 76.
 Mendlesohn 2002, pp. 178–181.
 Horne 2010, p. 81.
 Pharr 2016, pp. 12–13.
 Barratt 2012, p. 52.
 Levy, Marianne. "Is this picture of Harry Potter's goblin bankers offensive?". The Jewish Chronicle. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022.
 Richer, Stephen (14 July 2011). "Debunking the Harry Potter Antisemitism Myth". Moment Magazine. Archived from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022.
 Berlatsky, Noah (6 January 2022). "Opinion | Why most people still miss these antisemitic tropes in "Harry Potter"". NBC News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022.
 "Scholastic Inc, J.K. Rowling and Time Warner Entertainment Company, L.P, Plaintiffs/Counterclaim Defendants, -against- Nancy Stouffer: United States District Court for the Southern District of New York". ICQ. 17 September 2002. Archived from the original on 7 June 2007. Retrieved 12 June 2007.
 McCarthy, Kieren (2000). "Warner Brothers bullying ruins Field family Xmas". The Register. Archived from the original on 3 November 2015. Retrieved 3 May 2007.
 "Fake Harry Potter novel hits China". BBC News. 4 July 2002. Archived from the original on 1 September 2007. Retrieved 11 March 2007.
 O'Kane, Caitlin. Nashville school bans "Harry Potter" series, citing risk of "conjuring evil spirits". CBS News. Retrieved on 3 September 2019. "Rev. Reehil believes, 'The curses and spells used in the books are actual curses and spells; which when read by a human being risk conjuring evil spirits into the presence of the person reading the text.' It is unclear if the movies have been banned, since they don't require children to read spells." Archived from the original
 Anatol, Giselle Liza (2003). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. p. 54.
 Espinoza, Javier (16 December 2015). "Religious parents want Harry Potter banned from the classroom because it 'glorifies witchcraft'". Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via The Telegraph.
 Bonta, Steve (28 January 2002). "Tolkien's Timeless Tale". The New American. Vol. 18, no. 2.
 Liddle, Rod (21 July 2007). "Hogwarts is a winner because boys will be sexist neocon boys". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 4 June 2010. Retrieved 17 August 2008.
 American Library Association (26 March 2013). "Top 10 Most Challenged Books Lists". Advocacy, Legislation & Issues. Archived from the original on 24 July 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2021.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 7–14.
 Beckett, S.L. (2008). "Child-to-Adult Crossover Fiction". Crossover Fiction. Taylor & Francis. pp. 112–115. ISBN 978-0-415-98033-3. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2009.
 Garner, D. (1 May 2008). "Ten Years Later, Harry Potter Vanishes From the Best-Seller List". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Retrieved 16 May 2009.
 Bolonik, K. (16 August 2000). "A list of their own". Salon.com. Archived from the original on 4 May 2009. Retrieved 16 May 2009.
 Corliss, R. (21 July 2000). "Why 'Harry Potter' Did a Harry Houdini". Time. Archived from the original on 10 March 2010. Retrieved 16 May 2009.
 Levy & Mendlesohn 2016, pp. 8, 164–65.
 Butler 2012, p. 232.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 106–8.
 Stableford 2009, pp. xli, lx–lxi, 72.
 Levy & Mendlesohn 2016, p. 161–62.
 Stableford 2009, pp. 72–73.
 Stableford 2009, p. 73.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 108–9.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 105–6.
 Levy & Mendlesohn 2016, pp. 164–65.
 Levy & Mendlesohn 2016, p. 167.
 Levy & Mendlesohn 2016, p. 168–70.
 Striphas 2009, pp. 158–59, 166–67.
 Mendlesohn & James 2012, p. 167.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 33–35.
 Eccleshare 2002, pp. 10–12.
 Mendlesohn & James 2012, pp. 165, 171.
 Mendlesohn & James 2012, p. 165.
 Gunelius 2008, p. 99.
 Taub & Servaty-Seib 2008, p. 13.
 Gunelius 2008, p. 121.
 Popple 2015, pp. 194–95.
 Kean, Danuta (27 January 2017). "Harry Potter character provides name for new species of crab". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 February 2017.
 Knapp, N.F. (2003). "In Defense of Harry Potter: An Apologia" (PDF). School Libraries Worldwide. 9 (1). International Association of School Librarianship: 78–91. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2011. Retrieved 14 May 2009.
 Penrod, D (December 2001). "The Trouble with Harry: A Reason for Teaching Media Literacy to Young Adults". The Writing Instructor. Professional Writing Program at Purdue University. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 16 May 2009.
 Heilman 2008, p. 2
 "To Read or Not to Read; A question of national consequence" (PDF). National Endowment for the Arts. November 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 November 2015.
 Rich, Motoko (11 July 2007). "Harry Potter has limited effect on reading habits". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 February 2017.
 Hurd, Gordon (20 March 2007). "Fantastic Fiction". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on 22 December 2007. Retrieved 7 April 2007.
 Conn, J.J. (2002). "What can clinical teachers learn from Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone?". Medical Education. 36 (12): 1176–1181. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.463.8854. doi:10.1046/j.1365-2923.2002.01376.x. PMID 12472752. S2CID 22560995.
 Fields, J.W. (2007). "Harry Potter, Benjamin Bloom, and the Sociological Imagination" (PDF). International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education. 19 (2). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 August 2010. Retrieved 15 May 2009.
 "Potter sparks pet owl demand". 18 December 2001. Archived from the original on 15 August 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2018.
 Paul, David (19 May 2012). "Hundreds of pet owls abandoned after Harry Potter craze fades". mirror. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018.
 "Harry Potter tour accused of cruelty for use of live 'Hedwigs'". The Independent. 23 March 2015. Archived from the original on 12 April 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2018.
 Megias, Diane A.; Anderson, Sean C.; Smith, Robert J.; Veríssimo, Diogo (4 October 2017). "Investigating the impact of media on demand for wildlife: A case study of Harry Potter and the UK trade in owls". PLOS ONE. 12 (10): e0182368. Bibcode:2017PLoSO..1282368M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0182368. ISSN 1932-6203. PMC 5627891. PMID 28976986.
 "England Trip 2004 - King's Cross Station". www.eg.bucknell.edu. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Platform 9-3/4, Kings Cross Station, London". www.mattblaze.org. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 Jim Mimiaga (5 May 2005). "Hello, Harry!". The Denver Post. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Pottering around England". The Globe and Mail. 30 July 2005. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 Owen, Paul (18 November 2005). "The Potter trainspotters". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 LeakyNews (15 December 2012). Harry Potter Shop at Platform 9 3/4, London. Retrieved 24 February 2025 – via YouTube.
 Lewis, Ellie (14 December 2012). "Harry Potter shop opens: the verdict". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Platform 9 3/4". Atlas Obscura. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Prince Charles and Camilla visit Harry Potter platform". BBC Newsround. 30 January 2013. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "As fans celebrate #BackToHogwarts day, J.K. Rowling talks about Harry Potter's kid". AV Club. 1 September 2015. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "'Harry Potter' author wishes James S. Potter luck at Hogwarts - UPI.com". UPI. 1 September 2015. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "JK Rowling makes 'back to Hogwarts' gaffe by getting key date wrong". BBC News. 1 September 2016. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Tom Felton returns to Hogwarts for Harry Potter film's 20th anniversary". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 Yossman, K. J. (1 September 2023). "Harry Potter Fans Celebrate Back to Hogwarts Day Across the World". Variety. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 Media, P. A. (2 September 2024). "Harry Potter fans boo as King's Cross ends 'back to Hogwarts' tradition". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Harry Potter fans boo after Hogwarts Express departures dropped". www.bbc.com. 2 September 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Harry Potter | Every moment of magic from Back to Hogwarts day 2024 | Wizarding World". www.harrypotter.com. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 Library, The Rowling (1 September 2024). "Everything revealed during the Back to Hogwarts 2024 event - The Rowling Library". Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Harry Potter | Everything you need to know about Back to Hogwarts season 2024 | Wizarding World". www.harrypotter.com. Retrieved 24 February 2025.
 "Harry Potter | Harry Potter Book Night". web.archive.org. 3 February 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2025.
 MuggleNet (6 February 2015). "MuggleNet celebrates Harry Potter Book Night!". MuggleNet. Retrieved 29 March 2025.
 "Harry Potter Book Night for 2015". The Bookseller. Retrieved 29 March 2025.
 "Bloomsbury Children's Books rebrands Harry Potter Book Night". The Bookseller. Retrieved 29 March 2025.
 "Harry Potter Book Day". www.bloomsbury.com. Retrieved 29 March 2025.
 Bill, Neto (19 April 2021). "Fiction Genres". eBooks Discounts. Archived from the original on 28 March 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2021.
 "Book honour for Harry Potter author". BBC News. 21 September 2001. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 "JK Rowling: From rags to riches". BBC News. 20 September 2008. Archived from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 "Book 'Oscar' for Potter author". BBC News. 30 May 2001. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 "Harry Potter casts a spell on the world". CNN. 18 July 1999. Archived from the original on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 "Harry Potter: Meet J.K. Rowling". Scholastic Inc. Archived from the original on 4 June 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2008.
 "2001 Hugo Awards". Hugo Awards. 26 July 2007. Archived from the original on 7 May 2011. Retrieved 19 April 2021.
 "Harry Potter beaten to top award". BBC News. 7 July 2000. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 28 September 2008.
 Levine, Arthur (2001–2005). "Awards". Arthur A. Levine Books. Archived from the original on 29 April 2006. Retrieved 21 May 2006.
 Fenske, Claudia (2008). Muggles, Monsters and Magicians: A Literary Analysis of the Harry Potter Series. Peter Lang. p. 3.
 "The Big Read: The Top 100" Archived 31 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 7 December 2016
 Fisher, Douglas; et al. (2004). "Interactive Read-Alouds: Is There a Common Set of Implementation Practices?" (PDF). The Reading Teacher. 58 (1): 8–17. doi:10.1598/RT.58.1.1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2012.
 National Education Association (2007). "Teachers' Top 100 Books for Children". Archived from the original on 20 September 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2012.
 "Person of the Year 2007 Runners-up: J. K. Rowling". Time. 23 December 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2007. Retrieved 23 December 2007.
 Bird, Elizabeth (7 July 2012). "Top 100 Chapter Book Poll Results". A Fuse #8 Production. Blog. School Library Journal (blog.schoollibraryjournal.com). Archived from the original on 13 July 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2012.
 "Owls get the sack, Harry Potter gets a set of stamps". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2022.
 Bell, Crystal (27 July 2012). "London Olympics: Voldemort, Mary Poppins Have An Epic Duel". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 14 April 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017.
 "100 'most inspiring' novels revealed by BBC Arts". BBC News. 5 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2019.
 Gunelius 2008, pp. 8, 37.
 Smith 2002, p. 210.
 "Warner Bros. Pictures mentions J. K. Rowling as producer". Business Wire. 20 September 2010. Archived from the original on 27 December 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
 "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone". The Guardian. London. 16 November 2001. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2007.
 Linder, Bran (28 March 2000). "Chris Columbus to Direct Harry Potter". IGN. Archived from the original on 13 January 2008. Retrieved 8 July 2007.
 "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (2002)". Yahoo! Inc. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 18 August 2008.
 "Goblet Helmer Confirmed". IGN. 11 August 2003. Archived from the original on 29 June 2007. Retrieved 29 July 2007.
 Daly, Steve (6 April 2007). "Sneak peek: Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix". Entertainment Weekly. p. 28. Archived from the original on 6 April 2007. Retrieved 26 October 2019.
 "Coming Sooner: Harry Potter Changes Release Date". TV Guide. Archived from the original on 18 April 2009. Retrieved 15 April 2009.
 "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince". Market Watch. 14 August 2008. Archived from the original on 20 August 2008. Retrieved 17 August 2008.
 Boucher, Geoff (13 March 2008). "Final 'Harry Potter' book will be split into two movies". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. Retrieved 13 March 2008.
 "Last Day 12 June 2010". Snitchseeker.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2011.
 "Fantastic Beasts: JK Rowling confirms there will be five films in Harry Potter spin-off series". The Independent. 14 October 2016. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017.
 "Fantastic Beasts 3 cast, release date, plot, title and everything you need to know". Digital Spy. 10 December 2018. Archived from the original on 29 December 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2018.
 "All Time Top 20 Best Selling Games". 21 May 2003. Archived from the original on 21 February 2006. Retrieved 1 December 2006.
 EA Harry Potter Archived 10 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 19 June 2010.
 EA Harry Potter gameplay Retrieved 19 June 2010. Archived 1 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine
 Robinson, Andy (5 June 2012). "E3 2012: Sony announces intriguing Wonderbook for PS3—Harry Potter author on board". Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on 8 June 2012. Retrieved 5 June 2012.
 Mayo, Benjamin (24 April 2018). "Harry Potter: Hogwarts Mystery game now available on iPhone and iPad, but it's an obnoxious free-to-play game". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on 25 April 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2018.
 "Hogwarts Legacy—extended gameplay showcase". Gematsu. 11 November 2022. Retrieved 17 October 2023.
 "Harry Potter and the Cursed Child". Harry Potter The Play. harrypottertheplaylondon.com. 2016. Archived from the original on 26 September 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016.
 Lyall, Sarah (7 June 2016). "'Harry Potter and the Cursed Child' Begins Previews in London, as Magic Continues". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 April 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2016.
 "First batch of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child tickets sell out". BBC News. 29 October 2015. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015.
 Gerard, Jeremy (4 May 2017). "'Harry Potter And The Cursed Child' Sets April 22, 2018 Broadway Opening". Deadline. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017.
 "Harry Potter and the Cursed Child | Melbourne". Harry Potter and the Cursed Child | Melbourne. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 25 October 2017.
 Goldberg, Lesley (25 January 2021). "'Harry Potter' Live-Action TV Series in Early Development at HBO Max (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021.
 "First ever Harry Potter television series ordered by new streaming service, Max". Wizarding World. 12 April 2023. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023.
 "Introducing the enhanced streaming service: Max". Wizarding World. 12 April 2023. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 13 April 2023.
 "Harry Potter". Production List | Film & Television Industry Alliance. 24 February 2025. Retrieved 12 March 2025.
 White, Peter (25 June 2024). "'Harry Potter' & 'Welcome To Derry' Moving From Max To HBO As Part Of Big-Budget Streaming Strategy Rethink". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 25 June 2024.
 Tapp, Tom (23 February 2024). "'Harry Potter' TV Series Due To Hit Max In 2026: Everything We Know About The Cast, What J.K. Rowling Says & More—Update". Deadline. Retrieved 23 February 2024.
 "Harry Potter | Open casting call for Harry, Ron and Hermione actors in UK and Ireland | Wizarding World". www.harrypotter.com. Retrieved 20 March 2025.
 Shafer, Ellise (5 December 2024). "'Harry Potter' HBO Series to Film in Summer 2025 After 32,000 Kids Auditioned for Lead Roles". Variety. Retrieved 20 March 2025.
 "Cast It Talent". web.archive.org. 9 September 2024. Retrieved 20 March 2025.
 Otterson, K. J. Yossman,Joe (11 November 2024). "'Harry Potter' TV Series Eyes Mark Rylance for Dumbledore (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved 28 January 2025.
 Andreeva, Nellie (12 February 2025). "John Lithgow Nears Deal To Play Dumbledore In HBO's 'Harry Potter' Series". Deadline. Retrieved 14 February 2025.
 Northrup, Ryan (25 February 2025). "John Lithgow Confirms Casting As Dumbledore In HBO's Harry Potter: "This Is Going To Define The Last Chapter Of My Life" [Exclusive]". ScreenRant. Retrieved 25 February 2025.
 McPherson, Chris; Weintraub, Steven (25 February 2025). ""There's a Good Deal of Controversy": John Lithgow Knows How Fans Feel About Him Playing Dumbledore in the 'Harry Potter' TV Series [Exclusive]". Collider. Retrieved 28 February 2025.
 DeNicola, Tiana (13 March 2025). "John Lithgow Says Dumbledore in HBO's 'Harry Potter' Series Is the 'Last Big Role I'll Probably Play,' Teases Trinity Killer's Return in New 'Dexter' Series". Variety. Retrieved 16 March 2025.
 "John Lithgow doesn't think playing Dumbledore will be 'that hard a job'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 25 March 2025.
 "TV casting call for kids living near Leavesden 'looks to be for Harry Potter'". Watford Observer. 11 March 2025. Retrieved 26 March 2025.
 "EXP Juniors". Extra People. Retrieved 26 March 2025.
 Andreeva, Nellie (7 March 2025). "'Harry Potter': Janet McTeer In Negotiations To Play McGonagall; Paapa Essiedu Near Deal To Play Snape In HBO Series". Deadline. Retrieved 10 March 2025.
 Garcia, Jason (17 June 2010). "Big day is here: Universal hopes Harry Potter's magic will last". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
 "Wizarding World of Harry Potter theme park opens". Australia Times. 19 June 2010. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 19 June 2010.
 Niles, Robert (July 8, 2014). "The Wizarding World of Harry Potter—Diagon Alley opens officially at Universal Studios Florida". Theme Park Insider. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
 Kohler, Chris (2014). "What to Expect From the Wild New Harry Potter Ride, 'Escape From Gringotts'". Wired. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014.
 Goldman, Eric (May 8, 2013). "Details on Expansion of Wizarding World of Harry Potter in Orlando Confirmed, Including Diagon Alley as Second Location". IGN. Archived from the original on October 8, 2013. Retrieved May 8, 2013.
 MacDonald, Brady (May 9, 2013). "What may come to Wizarding World of Harry Potter 2.0 at Universal Orlando". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved May 18, 2013.
 Barnes, Brooks (8 April 2014). "A Makeover at Universal Studios Hollywood Aims at Disney". The New York Times. Universal City, California. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014.
 "What to expect when the Wizarding World at Universal Studios Hollywood opens in April". Los Angeles Times. 14 January 2016. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016.
 Bevil, Dewayne (18 April 2014). "Universal Studios Japan: Wizarding World of Harry Potter to open July 15". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014.
 Cripps, Karla (16 July 2014). "Universal Studios Japan's 'Wizarding World of Harry Potter' opens". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 12 September 2014.
 "Harry Potter tour to open at Leavesden studios in 2012". BBC News. 5 March 2011. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011. Retrieved 18 May 2011.
 "Harry Potter tour at Leavesden Studios reveals new sets". BBC News. 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 16 February 2012.
 "Harry Potter Studio Tour Tokyo to Open in 2023". Japan Web Magazine.
 Atkinson, Simon (19 July 2007). "How Rowling conjured up millions". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2008.
 Comic Relief: Quidditch Through the Ages. Albris. Archived from the original on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2008.
 "The Money". Comic Relief. Archived from the original on 29 October 2007. Retrieved 25 October 2007.
 "JK Rowling book fetches £2 m". BBC News. 13 December 2007. Archived from the original on 15 December 2007. Retrieved 13 December 2007.
 "The Tales of Beedle the Bard". Amazon UK. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 14 December 2007.
 Williams, Rachel (29 May 2008). "Rowling pens Potter prequel for charities". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 30 March 2010.
 Chan, Melissa (17 August 2016). "J.K. Rowling Is About to Release 3 New 'Harry Potter' Books". Time. Archived from the original on 16 December 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2016.
 "Waiting for Pottermore?". Pottermore Insider. 8 March 2012. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 9 March 2012.
 van Gilder Cooke, Sonia (23 June 2011). "'Pottermore' Secrets Revealed: J.K. Rowling's New Site is E-Book Meets Interactive World". Time. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2013.
 "Pottermore". Pottermore. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 8 October 2015.
Sources
Anatol, Giselle Liza, ed. (2003). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-313-32067-5. OCLC 50774592.
Carey, Brycchan (2003). "Hermione and the house-elves: the literary and historical contexts of J. K. Rowling's antislavery campaign". In Anatol, Giselle Liza (ed.). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Praeger. ISBN 9780313320675.
Gallardo, Ximena; Smith, C. Jason (2003). "Cinderfella: J. K. Rowling's wily web of gender". In Anatol, Giselle Liza (ed.). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Praeger. ISBN 9780313320675.
Ostry, Elaine (2003). "Accepting Mudbloods: the ambivalent social vision of J. K. Rowling's fairy tales". In Anatol, Giselle Liza (ed.). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Praeger. ISBN 9780313320675.
Park, Julia (2003). "Class and socioeconomic identity in Harry Potter's England". In Anatol, Giselle Liza (ed.). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Praeger. ISBN 9780313320675.
Shanoes, Veronica (2003). "Cruel heroes and treacherous texts: educating the reader in moral complexity and critical reading in J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter books". In Anatol, Giselle Liza (ed.). Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays. Praeger. ISBN 9780313320675.
Barratt, Bethany (2012). The Politics of Harry Potter. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9781137016546. ISBN 978-0-230-60899-3.
Bell, Christopher, ed. (2012). Hermione Granger Saves the World: Essays on the Feminist Heroine of Hogwarts. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-7137-9.
Bell, Christopher; Alexander, Julie (2012). "Introduction". In Bell, Christopher (ed.). Hermione Granger Saves the World: Essays on the Feminist Heroine of Hogwarts. McFarland & Company.
Berents, Helen (2012). "Hermione Granger goes to war". In Bell, Christopher (ed.). Hermione Granger Saves the World: Essays on the Feminist Heroine of Hogwarts. McFarland & Company.
Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena, eds. (22 April 2016). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315586748. ISBN 978-1-317-12211-1.
Berberich, Christine (22 April 2016). "Harry Potter and the idea of the gentleman as hero". In Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena (eds.). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge.
McEvoy, Kathleen (22 April 2016). "Heroism at the margins". In Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena (eds.). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge.
Nikolajeva, Maria (22 April 2016). "Adult heroism and role models in the Harry Potter novels". In Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena (eds.). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge.
Pharr, Mary (22 April 2016). "A paradox: the Harry Potter series as both epic and postmodern". In Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena (eds.). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge.
Singer, Rita (22 April 2016). "Harry Potter and the battle for the soul: the revival of the psychomachia in secular fiction". In Berndt, Katrin; Steveker, Lena (eds.). Heroism in the Harry Potter Series. Routledge.
Blake, Andrew (2002). The Irresistible Rise of Harry Potter. London: Verso Books. ISBN 1-85984-666-1. OCLC 49594480.
Butler, Catherine (2012). "Modern children's fantasy". In James, Edward; Mendlesohn, Farah (eds.). The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CCOL9780521429597. ISBN 978-0-521-42959-7.
Clark, Giles; Phillips, Angus (2019). Inside Book Publishing. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-351-26571-3.
Eberhardt, Maeve (2017). "Gendered representations through speech: The case of the Harry Potter series". Language and Literature. 26 (3): 227–246. doi:10.1177/0963947017701851. S2CID 149129001.
Eccleshare, Julia (2002). A Guide to the Harry Potter Novels. London: Continuum. ISBN 978-1-84714-418-8. OCLC 229341237.
Errington, Philip W. (2017). J.K. Rowling: A Bibliography. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4742-9737-0.
Farmer, Joy (2001). "The magician's niece: the kinship between J. K. Rowling and C. S. Lewis". Mythlore. 23 (2): 53–64. ISSN 0146-9339. JSTOR 26814627.
Groves, Beatrice (2017). Literary Allusion in Harry Potter. Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315269337. ISBN 978-1-315-26933-7.
Gunelius, Susan (2008). Harry Potter: The Story of a Global Business Phenomenon. Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9780230594104. ISBN 978-0-230-59410-4.
Gupta, Suman (2009). Re-Reading Harry Potter (2nd ed.). London: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9780230279711. ISBN 978-0-230-21958-8.
Heilman, Elizabeth E., ed. (7 August 2008). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203892817. ISBN 978-1-135-89154-1.
Alton, Anne Hiebert (7 August 2008). "Playing the genre game: generic fusions of the Harry Potter series". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Applebaum, Peter (7 August 2008). "The great Snape debate". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Birch, Megan L. (7 August 2008). "Schooling Harry Potter: teachers and learning, power and knowledge". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Ciaccio, Peter (7 August 2008). "Harry Potter and Christian theology". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Heilman, Elizabeth E.; Donaldson, Trevor (7 August 2008). "From sexist to (sort-of) feminist representations of gender in the Harry Potter series". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Nikolajeva, Maria (7 August 2008). "Harry Potter and the secrets of children's literature". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Taub, Deborah J.; Servaty-Seib, Heather L. (7 August 2008). "Controversial content: is Harry Potter harmful to children?". In Heilman, Elizabeth E. (ed.). Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Horne, Jackie C. (2010). "Harry and the other: answering the race question in J. K. Rowling's Harry Potter". The Lion and the Unicorn. 34 (1): 76–104. doi:10.1353/uni.0.0488. S2CID 143738308. ProQuest 221753179.
Kirk, Connie Ann (2003). J.K. Rowling: A Biography. Greenwood Press. ISBN 0-313-32205-8. OCLC 49991592.
Levy, Michael; Mendlesohn, Farah (2016). Children's Fantasy Literature: An Introduction. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139087421. ISBN 978-1-107-01814-3.
Los, Fraser (2008). "Harry Potter and the nature of death". Alternatives Journal. 34 (1): 32–33. JSTOR 45033580.
Mendlesohn, Farah; James, Edward (2012). A Short History of Fantasy. Libri Publishing. ISBN 978-1-907471-66-7. OCLC 857653620.
Nel, Philip (2001). J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter Novels: A Reader's Guide. New York: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-5232-9. OCLC 47050453.
Popple, Jennifer E. (2015). "Embracing the magic: Muggle Quidditch and the transformation of gender equality from fantasy to reality". In Brenner, Lisa S. (ed.). Playing Harry Potter: Essays and Interviews on Fandom and Performance. McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-1-4766-2136-4.
Pugh, Tison; Wallace, David L. (Fall 2006). "Heteronormative heroism and queering the school story in J.K. Rowling's Harry Potter series". Children's Literature Association Quarterly. 31 (3): 260–281. doi:10.1353/chq.2006.0053. S2CID 143508785.
Smith, Sean (2002). J.K. Rowling: A Biography. Arrow Books. ISBN 0-09-944542-5. OCLC 51303518.
Stableford, Brian M. (2009). The A to Z of Fantasy Literature. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6345-3. OCLC 1200815959.
Striphas, Theodore G. (2009). "Harry Potter and the Culture of the Copy". The Late Age of Print: Everyday Book Culture from Consumerism to Control. New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 141–174. ISBN 978-0-231-14814-6. OCLC 256532755.
Stojilkov, Andrea (2015). "Life(and)death in 'Harry Potter': the immortality of love and soul". Mosaic: An Interdisciplinary Critical Journal. 48 (2): 133–148. ISSN 0027-1276. JSTOR 44030425.
Whited, Lana A., ed. (2002). The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Literary Phenomenon. Columbia, Missouri: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0-8262-6330-8. OCLC 56424948.
Doughty, Terri (2002). "Locating Harry Potter in the 'Boys' Book' market". In Whited, Lana A. (ed.). The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Literary Phenomenon. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 9780826214430.
Mendlesohn, Farah (2002). "Crowning the king: Harry Potter and the construction of authority". In Whited, Lana A. (ed.). The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Literary Phenomenon. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 9780826214430.
Natov, Roni (2002). "Harry Potter and the extraordinariness of the ordinary". In Whited, Lana A. (ed.). The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter: Perspectives on a Literary Phenomenon. University of Missouri Press. ISBN 9780826214430.
Whited, Lana A. (2015). "A survey of the critical reception of the Harry Potter series". In Grimes, M. Katherine; Whited, Lana A. (eds.). Critical Insights: The Harry Potter Series. Salem Press. ISBN 978-1-61925-520-3. EBSCOhost 108515151.
Further reading
Allardice, Lisa (18 June 2022). "'There was practically a riot at King's Cross': an oral history of Harry Potter at 25". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 August 2024.
Burkart, Gina (2005). A parent's guide to Harry Potter. InterVarsity Press. ISBN 978-0-8308-3288-0. Harry Potter.
Duriez, Colin (2007). Field Guide to Harry Potter. IVP Books. ISBN 978-0-8308-3430-3.
Mulholland, Neil (2007). The Psychology of Harry Potter: An Unauthorized Examination of the Boy Who Lived. BenBella Books. ISBN 978-1-932100-88-4.
Silvester, William (2010). Harry Potter Collector's Handbook. Krause. ISBN 978-1-4402-0897-3.
External links
Listen to this article (59 minutes)
Duration: 59 minutes and 19 seconds.59:19
Spoken Wikipedia icon
This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 28 October 2024, and does not reflect subsequent edits.
(Audio help · More spoken articles)
Harry Potter
at Wikipedia's sister projects
Definitions from Wiktionary
Media from Commons
News from Wikinews
Quotations from Wikiquote
Texts from Wikisource
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Resources from Wikiversity
Travel information from Wikivoyage
Data from Wikidata
HarryPotter.com Wizarding World Digital/Warner Brothers Entertainment
Harry Potter at Scholastic.com (US publisher)
Harry Potter at Bloomsbury (U.K. publisher)
Archived official movie site Warner Brothers
Harry Potter collected news and commentary at The New York Times
vte
Harry Potter by J. K. Rowling
Wizarding World
Books	
Main novels	
The Philosopher's StoneThe Chamber of SecretsThe Prisoner of AzkabanThe Goblet of FireThe Order of the PhoenixThe Half-Blood PrinceThe Deathly Hallows
Spin-offs	
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find ThemQuidditch Through the AgesThe Tales of Beedle the Bard
Short stories	
PrequelHogwarts: An Incomplete and Unreliable GuideShort Stories from Hogwarts of Power, Politics and Pesky PoltergeistsShort Stories from Hogwarts of Heroism, Hardship and Dangerous Hobbies
Feature films	
Harry Potter
(cast · music)	
The Philosopher's Stone soundtrack, "Hedwig's Theme"The Chamber of Secrets soundtrackThe Prisoner of Azkaban soundtrackThe Goblet of Fire soundtrackThe Order of the Phoenix soundtrackThe Half-Blood Prince soundtrackThe Deathly Hallows – Part 1 productionsoundtrackThe Deathly Hallows – Part 2 productionsoundtrackaccolades
Fantastic Beasts
(cast · characters)	
Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them soundtrackThe Crimes of Grindelwald soundtrackThe Secrets of Dumbledore
Characters	
Harry PotterRon WeasleyHermione GrangerLord VoldemortAlbus DumbledoreSeverus SnapeRubeus HagridMinerva McGonagallDraco MalfoyNeville LongbottomFred and George WeasleyGinny WeasleySirius BlackRemus LupinBellatrix LestrangeDolores UmbridgeLuna LovegoodBlaise ZabiniList of all characters
Groups	
Hogwarts staffOrder of the PhoenixDeath EatersMinistry of Magic
Fictional universe	
Magic CreaturesObjectsPlaces HogwartsBeauxbatonsMuggleQuidditch
Other works	
Wizarding World DigitalThe Cursed ChildHogwarts Tournament of Houses20th Anniversary: Return to Hogwarts
Inspired media	
Video games	
Lego Creator: Harry PotterThe Philosopher's Stone (2001) PlayStationPCGame Boy AdvanceGame Boy ColorThe Chamber of SecretsCreator: Harry Potter and the Chamber of SecretsQuidditch World CupThe Philosopher's Stone (2003)The Prisoner of AzkabanThe Goblet of FireThe Order of the PhoenixThe Half-Blood PrinceLego Harry Potter: Years 1–4The Deathly Hallows – Part 1The Deathly Hallows – Part 2Lego Harry Potter: Years 5–7Harry Potter for KinectBook of SpellsBook of PotionsLego DimensionsFantastic Beasts: Cases From the Wizarding WorldHogwarts MysteryWizards UniteMagic AwakenedHogwarts LegacyQuidditch Champions
Attractions	
The Wizarding World of Harry Potter OrlandoJapanHollywoodDragon ChallengeFlight of the HippogriffHagrid's Magical Creatures Motorbike AdventureThe Escape from GringottsThe Forbidden JourneyHogwarts ExpressMovie Magic Experience
Exhibitions	
The ExhibitionA History of MagicWarner Bros. Studio Tour London – The Making of Harry Potter
Other	
Lego Harry PotterTrading Card Game
Fandom	
A Celebration of Harry PotterDrarryFandom ForwardThe Leaky CauldronMischief ManagementMuggleNetScorbusWizard rockWolfstarWrockstock
Fan fictions	
All the Young DudesHarry Potter and the Methods of RationalityHogwarts School of Prayer and MiraclesMy Immortal
Fan films	
Hermione Granger and the Quarter Life CrisisSeverus Snape and the MaraudersVoldemort: Origins of the Heir
Parodies	
A Very Potter Musical	
A Very Potter Musical albumA Very Potter Sequel EPA Very Potter Senior Year
Other	
Epic MovieMuddle Earth TooSkulduggery Pleasant: ResurrectionPotter Puppet PalsPuffsWizard People, Dear ReaderTreehouse of Horror XII
Related	
Influences and analoguesLegal disputesList of organisms named after the Harry Potter seriesPoliticsPortkey GamesReligious debatesTranslationHarry, A HistoryHarry Potter and the Sacred TextThe Harry Potter LexiconThe Magical Worlds of Harry PotterPollomuhku ja PosityyhtynenPotterlessHeyday Films
 Category Outline
vte
Works by J. K. Rowling
vte
Books I Love Best Yearly: Younger Readers Award
vte
Books I Love Best Yearly: Older Readers Award
Portals:
 Children's literature
icon Speculative fiction
 Literature
icon 1990s
 2000s
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Categories: Harry Potter20th-century British children's literature21st-century British children's literatureBILBY Award–winning worksBoarding school fictionBook franchisesBook series introduced in 1997British bildungsromansBritish novels adapted into filmsChildren's books about magicChildren's books about witchesChildren's books set in schoolsContemporary fantasy novelsNovels about dragonsElves in popular cultureFantasy novel seriesFiction about cursesGiants in popular cultureFiction about invisibilityNovels about secret societiesFiction about wizardsGhosts in popular cultureHeptalogiesNovels about magicNovels adapted into video gamesNovels by J. K. RowlingNovels set in schoolsWizarding WorldFiction about magic schools
This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 08:31 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Harry Potter

132 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Search results
Help

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
This page always uses small font size

Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
irin man
Results 1 – 20 of 424
Did you mean: iron man
The page "Irin man" does not exist. You can create a draft and submit it for review or request that a redirect be created, but consider checking the search results below to see whether the topic is already covered.

View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)
Thumbnail for Chelsea Manning
Chelsea Manning
2013). "Manning announces she is transitioning". Feministing. Archived from the original on August 24, 2013. Retrieved August 28, 2013. Carmon, Irin (August...
252 KB (23,339 words) - 04:09, 6 May 2025
Thumbnail for Watcher (angel)
Watcher (angel) (redirect from Irin and Qaddishin)
Aramaic fragments with the phrase irin we-qadishin, "Watchers and Holy Ones", a reference to Aramaic Daniel. The Aramaic irin "watchers" is rendered as "angel"...
30 KB (3,818 words) - 16:47, 1 January 2025
Thumbnail for Olivia Munn
Olivia Munn
correspondent on Comedy Central's The Daily Show. Her credentials were questioned by Irin Carmon of the website Jezebel, who suggested that Munn was better known as...
55 KB (4,435 words) - 03:43, 7 May 2025
Thumbnail for Blaise Compaoré
Blaise Compaoré
Political agreement aims to end 12-year feud", IRIN, 21 August 2006. "COTE D'IVOIRE: New peace agreement", IRIN, 5 March 2007. "Mali Tuareg rebels seize key...
36 KB (3,494 words) - 17:02, 15 May 2025
Thumbnail for Iraq
Iraq
8 August 2014. "IRAQ: Christians live in fear of death squads". IRIN Middle East. IRIN. 19 October 2006. Retrieved 21 October 2013. Harrison, Frances (13...
184 KB (17,720 words) - 05:00, 15 May 2025
Thumbnail for Michael Wolff (journalist)
Michael Wolff (journalist) (redirect from The Man Who Owns the News)
Newsmaker". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved August 6, 2021. Carmon, Irin (July 2, 2009). "Michael Wolff, On His Own (But Not Really)". WWD. Retrieved...
40 KB (3,805 words) - 15:39, 17 April 2025
Thumbnail for Israel
Israel
December 2022. "ISRAEL: Crackdown on illegal migrants and visa violators". IRIN. 14 July 2009. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 31...
392 KB (37,457 words) - 11:13, 15 May 2025
Thumbnail for Burkina Faso
Burkina Faso
2015. "Gains and losses as Burkina Faso fights child hunger". IRINnews. IRIN. 11 March 2014. Retrieved 19 October 2015. "Food Assistance Fact Sheet –...
172 KB (17,027 words) - 17:51, 15 May 2025
Thumbnail for Houthis
Houthis
15 October 2016. "Yemen: The conflict in Saada Governorate – analysis". IRIN. 24 July 2008. Archived from the original on 4 December 2014. Retrieved 29...
213 KB (18,517 words) - 20:25, 14 May 2025
Thumbnail for Fradique de Menezes
Fradique de Menezes
"Coup leaders hand power back to civilian president", IRIN, July 23, 2003. "Incumbent wins vote", IRIN, August 2, 2006. "Sao Tome leader 'still in charge'"...
6 KB (389 words) - 08:57, 8 March 2025
Thumbnail for Sage Elsesser
Sage Elsesser
record label Freedom Sounds with the release of his debut studio album Àdá Irin. Elsesser later followed-up with two studio albums; Song of Sage: Post Panic...
19 KB (1,225 words) - 05:02, 12 May 2025
Thumbnail for Kyrgyzstan
Kyrgyzstan
2022. "KYRGYZSTAN: Economic disparities driving inter-ethnic conflict". IRIN Asia. 15 February 2006. "Kyrgyzstan". Kyrgyzstan | Communist Crimes. Retrieved...
135 KB (13,181 words) - 21:50, 11 May 2025
Thumbnail for Molly Ringwald
Molly Ringwald
Gorgeous Over 40 Runway Cast". WWD. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Carmon, Irin (April 28, 2010). "Molly Ringwald On Teen Pregnancy, Bristol Palin, And For...
38 KB (3,131 words) - 17:52, 12 May 2025
Thumbnail for Thailand
Thailand
Asia: 191. Thailand: Burmese migrant children missing out on education. IRIN Asia. 15 June 2009. Archived 27 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine McGeown...
272 KB (23,883 words) - 02:46, 12 May 2025
Thumbnail for Rape
Rape
involved a perpetrator known to the victim. The humanitarian news organization IRIN claims that an estimated "500,000 rapes are committed annually in South Africa...
141 KB (16,027 words) - 06:10, 11 May 2025
Thumbnail for Martin D. Ginsburg
Martin D. Ginsburg
org. Supreme Court Historical Society. Retrieved 24 August 2023. Carmon, Irin (2015). Notorious R.B.G. The Life and Times of Ruth Bader Ginsburg. New York:...
17 KB (1,652 words) - 02:02, 11 April 2025
Thumbnail for Girl
Girl
Wayback Machine August 20, 2013 PHILIPPINES: Early marriage puts girls at risk IRIN, United Nations News Service (January 26, 2010) "How Come You Allow Little...
73 KB (8,571 words) - 06:48, 31 March 2025
Thumbnail for Djibouti
Djibouti
30 March 2013. "DJIBOUTI: Guelleh sworn in for second presidential term". IRIN Africa. 9 May 2005. Archived from the original on 29 November 2006. Retrieved...
173 KB (17,818 words) - 08:40, 13 May 2025
Riek Gai Kok
Rights Causes. New York: Human Rights Watch, 1999. p. 80 IRIN. 'SUDAN: A future without War?' - IRIN In-Depth on the prospects of peace in Sudan - Who is...
5 KB (577 words) - 21:11, 10 March 2025
Star Trek
from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2011. Carmon, Irin (July 9, 2019). "Shari Redstone's $30 Billion Triumph". Intelligencer. Archived...
129 KB (12,388 words) - 10:15, 13 May 2025
Texts from Wikisource
Nihongi/Book XV
Tha-kap-syo of Imna he slew Mak-ni-kè, the heir to the throne of Pèkché, at Irin. [This is a place in Koryö.] He built the castle of Tè-san, and then stood
See all results
Quotes from Wikiquote
Jenni Williams
Jenni Williams, a spokeswoman for Women of Zimbabwe Arise (WOZA), told IRIN This pain is not a weakness. It is strength. Our grief binds us. Do you feel
See all results
Textbooks from Wikibooks
Development Cooperation Handbook/Humanitarian aid
Performance APCN (Africa Partner Country Network) UN ReliefWeb AlertNet IRIN The ODI Humanitarian Policy Group Code of Conduct for the Red Cross and Red
See all results
View (previous 20 | next 20) (20 | 50 | 100 | 250 | 500)
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Search results
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Irin man

Article
Talk

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Look for Irin man on one of Wikipedia's sister projects:

Wiktionary (dictionary)

Wikibooks (textbooks)

Wikiquote (quotations)

Wikisource (library)

Wikiversity (learning resources)

Commons (media)

Wikivoyage (travel guide)

Wikinews (news source)

Wikidata (linked database)

Wikispecies (species directory)
Wikipedia does not have an article with this exact name. Please search for Irin man in Wikipedia to check for alternative titles or spellings.
You need to log in or create an account and be autoconfirmed to create new articles. Alternatively, you can use the article wizard to submit a draft for review, or request a new article.
Search for "Irin man" in existing articles.
Look for pages within Wikipedia that link to this title.
Other reasons this message may be displayed:

If a page was recently created here, it may not be visible yet because of a delay in updating the database; wait a few minutes or try the purge function.
Titles on Wikipedia are case sensitive except for the first character; please check alternative capitalizations and consider adding a redirect here to the correct title.
If the page has been deleted, check the deletion log, and see Why was the page I created deleted?
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Irin man
Add topic

Skip to content
harry potter 
harry potter 
Copilot Answer


Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince | Official Trailer
02:38
YouTubeHarry Potter
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince | Official Trailer
As Harry Potter begins his 6th year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, he discovers an old book marked mysteriously "This book is the property of the Half-Blood Prince" and begins to learn more about Lord Voldemort's dark past. #WizardingWorld #HarryPotter #HalfBloodPrince SUBSCRIBE ️ http://wizarding.world/6008yCNUA Welcome to ...
1.3M views
Aug 18, 2016
More videos
Harry Potter Films 1-4 Full Movie Recaps Livestream
11:54:54
Harry Potter Films 1-4 Full Movie Recaps Livestream
YouTubeHarry Potter
110.8K views9 hours ago
Best of Harry Potter 12-Hour Livestream
11:54:59
Best of Harry Potter 12-Hour Livestream
YouTubeHarry Potter
46.2K views6 days ago
Dumbledore's Best Moments | Compilation | Harry Potter
30:20
Dumbledore's Best Moments | Compilation | Harry Potter
YouTubeHarry Potter
46.1K views2 days ago
Images of Harry Potter










See all

Harry Potter - Wikipedia
In the first book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone in the US), Harry lives in a cupboard under the stairs in the house of the Dursleys, his aunt, uncle a…
Global Web Icon
Wikipedia
Explore the Wizarding World Online
What are the Hogwarts Houses?
Discover Fantastic Beasts Series
 
Was the above response helpful?
Global web icon
harrypotter.com
https://www.harrypotter.com

Harry Potter | Official home of Harry Potter, Hogwarts …
HarryPotter.com is the official home of Harry Potter, Fantastic Beasts, and the Wizarding World, formerly known as Pottermore. Brought to you by Wizarding World Digital and its parent company Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., …

 

getyourguide.com
https://www.getyourguide.com › England › Activities
Harry Potter Tour England | GetYourGuide
SponsoredConveniently book, download, store, and access your tickets — all from your mobile device. Bring the magic to life on your next trip. Book your destination's top Harry Potter tours.
Site visitors: Over 1M in the past month
The BEST England Harry Potter tours 2025
Cornwall Tour From London
United Kingdom
Pack the Hiking Boots
The London Eye
News about Harry Potter
bing.com › news
Harry Potter: 5 Hidden Movie Details You Definitely Missed On Your First Watch!
Koimoi
 · 1d
Harry Potter: 5 Hidden Movie Details You Definitely Missed On Your First Watch!
Think you've caught every magical moment in Harry Potter? These subtle details …

HBO’s ‘Harry Potter’ Reboot Must Highlight Dumbledore’s Worst Mistake That Led to the Saddest Death
FandomWire
FandomWire
 · 2h
HBO’s ‘Harry Potter’ Reboot Must Highlight Dumbledore’s Worst Mistake That Led to the Saddest Death
Michael McIntyre enjoys night out at Harry Potter launch after £200,000 sportscar towed away in Kensington
London Evening Standard
 · 11h · on MSN
Michael McIntyre enjoys night out at Harry Potter launch after £200,000 sportscar towed away in Kensington
When Tom Felton Revealed Michael Gambon Hid These Two Things In His Dumbledore Beard While Filming Harry Potter
Koimoi
 · 7h
When Tom Felton Revealed Michael Gambon Hid These Two Things In His Dumbledore Beard While Filming Harry Potter
Daniel Radcliffe Was Asked Which Harry Potter Character Would Be Fun To Play In The HBO Series, And He Had A Clever (And Realistic) Response
CINEMABLEND on MSN.com
 · 3h · on MSN
Daniel Radcliffe Was Asked Which Harry Potter Character Would Be Fun To Play In The HBO Series, And He Had A Clever (And Realistic) Response
Elderly Woman Reads 'Harry Potter Aur Maut Ke Tohfe' - Internet Laughs At 'Rana' And 'Hermangini' - VIDEO
Times Now on MSN.com
 · 2d · on MSN
Elderly Woman Reads 'Harry Potter Aur Maut Ke Tohfe' - Internet Laughs At 'Rana' And 'Hermangini' - VIDEO
Harry Potter Hid a Power Hierarchy, Dumbledore’s Basic Spells Are 100x Deadlier Than Half of Hogwarts
FandomWire
FandomWire
 · 9h
Harry Potter Hid a Power Hierarchy, Dumbledore’s Basic Spells Are 100x Deadlier Than Half of Hogwarts
Harry Potter star reveals OnlyFans “shame” as she resorts to being spanked with her hair to claw back money after debts
The Sun
 · 1d
Harry Potter star reveals OnlyFans “shame” as she resorts to being spanked with her hair to claw back money after debts
ComicBook.com
 · 57m
Saints Row Developer Almost Made a Harry Potter RPG Like Baldur’s Gate
Bleeding Cool
Bleeding Cool
 · 24m
LEGO Debuts New Harry Potter Quality Quidditch & Ice Cream Set
Is the new Harry Potter series pushing a hidden anti-trans narrative with JK Rowling’s involvement?
Masala!
Masala!
 · 13d
Is the new Harry Potter series pushing a hidden anti-trans narrative with JK Rowling’s involvement?

See all
Explore More News
dragon
OnlyFans
Jessie Cave
See more news
Global web icon
Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org › wiki › Harry_Potter

Harry Potter - Wikipedia
In the first book, Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone in the US), Harry lives in a cupboard under the stairs in the house of the Dursleys, his aunt, uncle and cousin, who all treat him poorly.

People also search for
official Harry Potter website
Harry Potter full movie
Harry Potter real name
Harry Potter chronological order
Global web icon
IMDb
https://www.imdb.com › list
The Harry Potter Movies in Chronological Order by Date of Release …
Harry Potter is tasked with the dangerous and seemingly impossible task of locating and …

Interesting reads - Harry Potter
Powered by MSN
30 Harry Potter Facts That Even Potterheads Don’t Know
Get your Time-Turner ready! We're returning to the wizarding world to reveal the hidden Harry Potter facts that even die-hard fans have missed.
Reader's Digest
15 Best Male Harry Potter Characters
Amongst heroes, professors, villains, and father figures, some male characters in Harry Potter left a mark in the fandom for better or for worse.
CBR
5 more great Harry Potter movie scenes that never happened in the books
Think every Harry Potter movie scene came straight from the books? Think again! From Dumbledore’s unexpected outburst to Harry’s dramatic duel with Voldemort, here are 5 moments that exist only in the films. Which one shocked you the most?
Wizards and Whatnot
80 Magical Harry Potter Quotes for Wizards and Muggles Alike
These funny, touching and just plain iconic Harry Potter quotes will make you want to reread or re-watch the series
Reader's Digest
10 Strongest Harry Potter Wizards From Gryffindor, Ranked
House Gryffindor has produced some wonderful witches and wizards over the centuries.
CBR

See all
See more
Global web icon
Screen Rant
https://screenrant.com › harry-potter-movies-in-order
How To Watch The Harry Potter Movies In Order (Chronologically …

Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone (1991 - 1992) Harry Potter and the …
Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (1992 - 1993) Harry Potter and the …
Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (1993 - 1994) Harry Potter and the …
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire (1994 - 1995) Harry Potter and the Goblet …
See full list on screenrant.com
Global web icon
YouTube
https://www.youtube.com › @harrypotter
Harry Potter - YouTube
Welcome to the official Harry Potter YouTube channel, home to 25 years of magic.

People also ask
Who starred in Harry Potter?
When did Harry Potter come out?
Is Harry Potter based on a true story?
Where can I watch Harry Potter movies online?
Is the wizarding world of Harry Potter a good book?
Who plays Harry Potter as an infant?
Related searches for harry potter
official Harry Potter website
Harry Potter full movie
Harry Potter real name
Harry Potter chronological order
Harry Potter and the deathly hallows
Harry Potter and sorcerer's stone
Harry Potter wikipedia
Harry Potter books in order
1
2
3
4
5
All images
Harry
Potter
All images
AuthorJ. K. Rowling
Cover artistThomas Taylor, Cliff Wright, Giles Greenfield, Jason Cockcroft
CountryUnited Kingdom
LanguageEnglish
See more
Timeline
1995
1995
Rowling finishes the manuscript of the first book.
1997
1997
The Philosopher's Stone is published in the UK.
1998
1998
The Sorcerer's Stone is published in the US.
2007
2007
The Deathly Hallows is published, completing the series.

See all

Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series, at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version.

The Harry Potter series ended after seven beloved books and eight incredibly successful movies, but there's still more to explore inside the wizarding world.

Harry Potter is the only human being known to have survived Voldemort’s Death Spell. The lightning bolt scar on his forehead is all what remains from the attack.
Explore more
Percy Jackson & the Olympians
Percy Jackson & the Olympians
Twilight
Twilight
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
Image: Getty Images. Data: Wikipedia · en.wikipedia.org · cbr.com · wizardinghome.com
Wikipedia text under CC-BY-SA license
Feedback
 
Related searches for harry potter
official Harry Potter website
Harry Potter full movie
Harry Potter real name
Harry Potter chronological order
Harry Potter and the deathly hallows
Harry Potter and sorcerer's stone
Harry Potter wikipedia
Harry Potter books in order
© 2025 Microsoft
Privacy and CookiesLegalAdvertiseHelpFeedback

WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Films

Future

Short film

Cast and crew

Production

Reception

Music

See also
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean (film series)

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
Checked
Page protected with pending changes
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the film series. For the franchise as a whole, see Pirates of the Caribbean.
Pirates of the Caribbean

Directed by	Gore Verbinski (1–3)
Rob Marshall (4)
Joachim Rønning (5)
Espen Sandberg (5)
Screenplay by	Ted Elliott (1–4)
Terry Rossio (1–4)
Jeff Nathanson (5)
Story by	Ted Elliott (1–4)
Terry Rossio (1–5)
Stuart Beattie (1)
Jay Wolpert (1)
Jeff Nathanson (5)
Based on	Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
On Stranger Tides by Tim Powers (4)
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	Johnny Depp (1–5)
Geoffrey Rush (1–5)
Kevin McNally (1–5)
Orlando Bloom (1–3, 5)
Keira Knightley (1–3, 5)
(See below)
Music by	Klaus Badelt (1)
Hans Zimmer (2–4)
Geoff Zanelli (5)
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Running time	726 minutes (1–5)
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	Total (5 films):
$1.274–1.364 billion
Box office	Total (5 films):
$4.524 billion
Pirates of the Caribbean is an American fantasy supernatural swashbuckler film series produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and based on Walt Disney's theme park attraction of the same name. The film series serves as a major component of the titular media franchise. The films' plots are set primarily in the Caribbean, based on a fictionalized version of the Golden Age of Piracy (c. 1650–1726) while also leading to the range of a mid-1700s setting.

Directors of the series include Gore Verbinski (films 1–3), Rob Marshall (4), Joachim Rønning (5), and Espen Sandberg (5). The series is primarily written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio (1–4); other writers include Stuart Beattie (1), Jay Wolpert (1) and Jeff Nathanson (5).

The stories follow the adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow (Johnny Depp), with Hector Barbossa (Geoffrey Rush) and Joshamee Gibbs (Kevin McNally) over the course of the films. Other characters featured in the original trilogy include Will Turner (Orlando Bloom), Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley), James Norrington (Jack Davenport), Governor Weatherby Swann (Jonathan Pryce), Pintel and Ragetti (Lee Arenberg and Mackenzie Crook), Marty (Martin Klebba), Cotton (David Bailie), Murtogg and Mullroy (Giles New and Angus Barnett), Lieutenant Gillette (Damian O'Hare), Theodore Groves (Greg Ellis), Bootstrap Bill Turner (Stellan Skarsgård), Lord Cutler Beckett (Tom Hollander), Tia Dalma (Naomie Harris), Davy Jones (Bill Nighy), and Sao Feng (Chow Yun-Fat). Despite focusing more on Jack Sparrow among several of the aforementioned characters, the fourth and fifth films serve as standalone sequels. The fourth film features Angelica (Penélope Cruz), Blackbeard (Ian McShane), Philip Swift (Sam Claflin), Syrena (Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey), and Scrum (Stephen Graham). The fifth film features Armando Salazar (Javier Bardem), Henry Turner (Brenton Thwaites), and Carina Smyth (Kaya Scodelario).

The film series started in 2003 with Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl, which had a positive reception from audiences and film critics. It grossed $654 million worldwide.[1] After the first film's success, Walt Disney Pictures announced that a film series was in the works. The franchise's second film, subtitled Dead Man's Chest, was released in 2006 and broke financial records worldwide the day of its premiere. Dead Man's Chest became the top-grossing movie of 2006 with almost $1.1 billion at the worldwide box office. The third film in the series, subtitled At World's End, followed in 2007 earning $960 million. Disney released a fourth film, subtitled On Stranger Tides, in 2011 in conventional 2D, Digital 3-D and IMAX 3D. On Stranger Tides succeeded in also grossing more than $1 billion,[1] becoming the second film in the franchise and only the eighth film in history to do this, at the time of release. A fifth film, subtitled Dead Men Tell No Tales, was released in 2017 earning $796 million.

The franchise has grossed over $4.5 billion worldwide.[1] It is the 16th-highest-grossing film series of all time, and is the first film franchise to produce two or more films that grossed over $1 billion.

Films
Film	U.S. release date	Director(s)	Screenwriter(s)	Story by	Producer
The Curse of the Black Pearl	July 9, 2003	Gore Verbinski	Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio	Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio, Stuart Beattie and Jay Wolpert	Jerry Bruckheimer
Dead Man's Chest	July 7, 2006	Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio
At World's End	May 25, 2007
On Stranger Tides	May 20, 2011	Rob Marshall
Dead Men Tell No Tales	May 26, 2017	Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg	Jeff Nathanson	Terry Rossio and Jeff Nathanson
Johnny Depp at a film premiere.
Rush at a festival.
McNally at a festival.
Bloom at a festival.
Knightley at a festival.
Martin Klebba at the premiere of Pirates of the Caribbean 3
Johnny Depp, Geoffrey Rush, Kevin McNally, Orlando Bloom, Keira Knightley, and Martin Klebba appeared in at least four films. Only Depp, Rush, and McNally reprised their roles in all five films.
Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl
Blacksmith Will Turner teams up with eccentric pirate Captain Jack Sparrow to save Turner's love, Elizabeth Swann, from cursed pirates led by Jack's mutinous former first mate, Hector Barbossa. Jack wants revenge against Barbossa, who left him stranded on an island before stealing his ship, the Black Pearl, along with 882 pieces of cursed Aztec Gold.

Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Company arrests Will and Elizabeth for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow in the previous film. Beckett offers clemency if Will agrees to search for Jack's compass in a bid to find the Dead Man's Chest—and inside, the heart of villainous Davy Jones—which would give Beckett control of the seas. However, Jack wants the Chest to escape from an unpaid debt with Jones, who made Jack captain of the Black Pearl for 13 years in exchange for 100 years of service aboard Jones' ship, the Flying Dutchman. Jack's debt is complicated by both Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann, who follow him out to sea.

Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End
Lord Beckett gains power over Davy Jones and, with the help of the Flying Dutchman, he is now executing his plans to extinguish piracy forever. To stand against the East India Trading Co., Will, Elizabeth, Barbossa, and the crew of the Black Pearl set out to rescue Captain Jack Sparrow from Davy Jones' Locker. As one of the Nine Pirate Lords, Jack is needed in order to release an ancient goddess with the power to defeat Beckett's forces.

Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
Captain Jack Sparrow is on a quest to find the fabled Fountain of Youth and crosses paths with a former lover, Angelica. She forces Jack aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge, a ship captained by the infamous pirate Blackbeard, Angelica's father. Both are also in search of the Fountain: Angelica to save her father's soul, Blackbeard to escape a prophecy of his demise at the hands of a one-legged man. Joining the hunt is former pirate captain Barbossa, now a privateer in King George II's Navy, who is in a race against the Spanish for the Fountain of Youth.

Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017)
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
A group of ghostly Spanish Royal Navy soldiers led by Jack Sparrow's old nemesis, Captain Armando Salazar, escape from the Devil's Triangle, with the goal of killing every pirate at sea, including Sparrow. To survive, Sparrow seeks out the legendary Trident of Poseidon, a powerful artifact whose owner can control the seas and break curses.[2] The film was released in many countries as Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge.[3]

Future
Untitled sixth film (TBA)
Shortly before the release of On Stranger Tides, it was reported that Disney was planning to shoot the fifth and the sixth films back-to-back,[4] although ultimately only the fifth installment was developed. By March 2017, director Joachim Rønning stated that Dead Men Tell No Tales was only the beginning of the final adventure, confirming that it would not be the last film of the series.[5] That September, producer Jerry Bruckheimer indicated that another Pirates of the Caribbean was still in development.[6]

In October of the same year, Kaya Scodelario stated that she was contractually signed to return for a sixth film.[7] Rønning was reportedly set to direct the film.[8] In October 2019, Disney announced that Craig Mazin and Ted Elliott would write Pirates of the Caribbean 6.[9][10] In May 2020, Bruckheimer commented that the first draft of the screenplay for the sixth film would soon be finished.[11] On April 20, 2022, during his defamation trial against ex-wife Amber Heard, Depp stated he had no intention of returning to the franchise, citing his strained relationship with Disney after they had removed him from the franchise before a verdict was reached in the case.[12][13]

In February 2023, Orlando Bloom had expressed interest in returning to the franchise.[14][15][16] In March, Keira Knightley explained to Entertainment Tonight why she would not make a return to the Disney franchise. "What about Elizabeth Swann?", Knightley joked when asked if she would re-join the crew, also commenting that her character sailed away "in brilliant style".[17] Bruckheimer was also still interested in potentially bringing back Depp to the saga.[18][19] In June, Depp was reportedly open to returning to the series if the project proves worthwhile.[20]

In August 2023, Craig Mazin stated that he'd pitched a Pirates script to Disney, but that he would only commit to it if he was able to work with Ted Elliot; Mazin confirmed that his and Elliot's script was bought by Disney, also commenting that it was "too weird", but the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike had slowed development of the sixth installment.[21]

In March 2024, Jerry Bruckheimer stated that the sixth film would be a reboot.[22] Despite this, two months later, Bruckheimer hoped to see Johnny Depp return.[23]

On May 20, 2024, in an interview with Entertainment Weekly, Bruckheimer provided further clarification on the series's status. Bruckheimer confirmed that, in addition to Elliott now writing National Treasure 3, there were two different Pirates movies in development. The first is a reboot that he intends to produce with scriptwriter Jeff Nathanson, and the second is the Margot Robbie film that will be penned by Christina Hodson. He stated that he hoped both films would be made, and noted that he thought Disney was receptive to the Robbie-led film. In regards to the reboot, he confirmed that it would not follow characters from the previous films, but stated that he hoped Depp would make an appearance.[24]

On December 4, 2024, a Variety article mentioned that Jerry Bruckheimer was developing two separate scripts, one of which featured Johnny Depp.[25]

Spin-off films
A female-led spin-off was announced in June 2020, starring Margot Robbie with Christina Hodson writing the screenplay. The film is separate from the sixth film also being developed. Bruckheimer was attached as producer.[26] In November 2022, Robbie said the project was not going forward.[27][28] Bruckheimer then shared the following month that the project wasn't officially dead and that a sequel merely took priority.[29] He then later reiterated that it will still be made and has a "very strong story" but also needs "a little more work".[30]

In an interview with The Hollywood Reporter, Jerry Bruckheimer stated that another spin-off "with a younger cast" is in the works alongside the Margot Robbie spin-off.[31]

In February 2024, it was rumored that Disney was considering Ayo Edebiri to "follow in Depp's footsteps" for the leading role, a character named "Anne" likely inspired by the real-life pirate Anne Bonny, in a tentatively titled Pirates 6, a female-fronted movie that centers on a younger cast of pirates searching for hidden treasure.[32] In response to the debunked rumors that Ayo Edebiri would replace Johnny Depp as the new lead, Daniel Richtman commented, "It's not true, there's no 'Replacing Depp' or anything like that. She's only the 'Type' they’re looking at for the lead in one of the planned spinoffs (not the Margot Robbie one)."[33] However, none of that has been officially confirmed by Disney.[34]

Short film
Pirates of the Caribbean: Tales of the Code: Wedlocked (2011)
Pirates of the Caribbean: Tales of the Code: Wedlocked is a live-action short directed by James Ward Byrkit.[35] There were many proposed titles, including Wedding Belles[36] and Pirate Belles.[37] Although it was only included as a special feature in the US 15-disc 3D Blu-ray/2D Blu-ray/DVD + Digital Copy box set that includes the first four films released on October 18, 2011,[38] it was also released in the similar UK five-disc set. Jim Byrkit conceived the idea for a short film while on the Shipwreck Cove set Rick Heinrichs designed for Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007), a project which interested Brigham Taylor at Disney. Screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio collaborated with Byrkit on the script, having envisioned something based on the Pirate Code Book as a device that could tie into other stories later. The short film was shot by cinematographer Nic Sadler. As the pirate cove sets from At World's End—where the short film takes place—were set to be demolished, the short project was prepped in a matter of days and shot over three days in late 2006.[36][39] In 2023, Rossio wrote on Wordplay that Tales of the Code was designed to be a series of a few fun shorts to fill in the Pirates universe and add to the DVD extras section. He also said that, in addition to Wedlocked, there are a few scripts around that were a part of that process.[37]

The short film Wedlocked serves as a prequel to Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl, inspired by the auction scene in the Disneyland attraction. Two wenches believe they are both betrothed to Jack Sparrow, but he has secretly traded them to the auctioneer for a fancy hat. They think the auctioneer is raising money for them, when in actuality they are being sold as brides to the highest bidder. Wedlocked had several Pirates veterans reprise their roles, like Vanessa Branch as Giselle, Lauren Maher as Scarlett, and David Bailie reprising his role as Cotton. The 10 minute short also featured John Vickery as the auctioneer and Dale Dickey as Oona the wench, as well as three pirates—Marquis D’avis, Atencio, and Slurry Gibson—who are named after Marc Davis, Xavier Atencio, and Blaine Gibson, the Imagineers who worked on the original attraction.[38]

Cast and crew
Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean characters and List of Pirates of the Caribbean film actors
Additional crew
Occupation	Films
Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl	Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest	Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End	Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides	Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
Composer	Klaus Badelt	Hans Zimmer	Geoff Zanelli
Editor(s)	Craig Wood
Arthur Schmidt
Stephen Rivkin	Craig Wood
Stephen Rivkin	Wyatt Smith
David Brenner	Roger Barton
Leigh Folsom Boyd
Cinematographer	Dariusz Wolski	Paul Cameron
Production companies	Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributor	Buena Vista Pictures Distribution	Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures
Production
Development
First film
Back in the early 1990s, Michael Frost Beckner and James Gorman pitched the script that would become Cutthroat Island to Michael Eisner as a potential Pirates of the Caribbean film, buoyed by support from development staff at Disney. Eisner turned it down, due to not wanting to mix the company's film and theme park divisions.[40] Almost a decade later, Walt Disney Pictures had Jay Wolpert write a script based on the Pirates of the Caribbean ride in 2001, which was based on a story created by Disney executives Brigham Taylor, Michael Haynes, and Josh Harmon. Stuart Beattie stated that he talked about making a pirate movie based on the ride while tossing a frisbee with a friend, and wrote a first draft titled "Quest for the Caribbean" while on exchange to Oregon State University in 1991.[41][42][43]

Screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio notably thought about the pirate genre based on the ride during the early 1990s, having pitched the idea after completing work on the 1992 film Aladdin as a premise to studio executives,[44] but there was no interest from any studio. Undeterred, the writing team refused to give up the dream, waiting for a studio to pick up their take on a pirate tale.[45] Producer Jerry Bruckheimer rejected Wolpert's script, feeling it was "a straight pirate movie".[46] In March 2002, Disney brought Beattie in to rewrite the script, due to his knowledge of piracy.[47] Later that month Elliott and Rossio were brought in, having worked with Disney in Aladdin and the 2002 film Treasure Planet, among other successful films.[46] Elliott and Rossio, inspired by the opening narration of the Pirates of the Caribbean ride, decided to give the film a supernatural edge.[48]

In June 2002, Gore Verbinski signed on to direct Pirates of the Caribbean, and Johnny Depp and Geoffrey Rush signed on the following month to star.[47] Verbinski was attracted to the idea of using modern technology to resurrect a genre, one that had disappeared after the Golden Age of Hollywood, and recalled his childhood memories of the ride, feeling the film was an opportunity to pay tribute to the "scary and funny" tone of it. Depp was attracted to the story as he found it quirky: rather than trying to find treasure, the crew of the Black Pearl were trying to return it in order to lift their curse, with the traditional mutiny having already taken place. Depp based Captain Jack Sparrow on a combination of The Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards and Looney Tunes cartoons, specifically the characters Bugs Bunny and Pepé Le Pew. Verbinski approached Rush for the role of Captain Barbossa, whom Depp named "Hector" behind the scenes, as he knew he would not play it with attempts at complexity, but with a simple villainy that would suit the story's tone.[49]

Orlando Bloom read the script after Rush, with whom he was working on Ned Kelly, suggested it to him, and was cast as Will Turner.[50] Keira Knightley came as a surprise to Verbinski: he had not seen her performance in Bend It Like Beckham and was impressed by her audition for Elizabeth Swann.[49] Tom Wilkinson was one of several actors negotiated with to play Governor Swann,[47] but the role went to Jonathan Pryce, whom Depp idolized.[49] Further additions include Jack Davenport as James Norrington, Kevin R. McNally as Joshamee Gibbs, Zoe Saldaña as Anamaria, David Bailie as Cotton, Lee Arenberg and Mackenzie Crook as Pintel and Ragetti, Martin Klebba as Marty, David Bailie as Cotton, Giles New and Angus Barnett as Murtogg and Mullroy, Damian O'Hare as Lieutenant Gillette,[45] and Greg Ellis as then-unnamed Theodore Groves.[51]

While Dick Cook had been a strong proponent of adapting Disney's rides into films, the box-office failure of The Country Bears (2002) made Michael Eisner and Robert Iger attempt to shut down production of Pirates of the Caribbean. Although Bruckheimer was Disney's most reliable and successful producer, Eisner second-guessed the early footage, complaining about Depp's character, and as the budget rose, threatened to cancel the film. However, Verbinski told his concept artists to keep working, and Bruckheimer changed the executives' minds when he showed them concept art and animatics.[52] As recalled in the book DisneyWar, Eisner asked "Why does it have to cost so much?". Bruckheimer replied, "Your competition is spending $150 million," referring to franchises like The Lord of the Rings and The Matrix. Eisner concurred, but with the stigma attached to theme-park adaptations, Eisner requested that Verbinski and Bruckheimer remove some of the more overt references to the ride in the script, such as a scene where Sparrow and Turner enter the cave via a waterfall. Another change made was adding The Curse of the Black Pearl as a subtitle, should the film be a hit and lend itself to sequels like Raiders of the Lost Ark, which brought protest due to the Black Pearl being the name of the ship and nothing to do with the pirates' curse. Although Verbinski thought the subtitle was nonsense, Eisner refused to back down, and The Curse of the Black Pearl remained the subtitle, though on most posters and trailers the words were so small as to be barely visible.[53][54]

Shooting for The Curse of the Black Pearl began on October 9, 2002, and wrapped by March 7, 2003.[47] Before its release, many executives and journalists had expected the film to flop, as the pirate genre had not been successful for years, the film was based on a theme-park ride, and Depp rarely made a big film.[55] However, The Curse of the Black Pearl became both a critical and commercial success.

Second and third films
After seeing how well the first film was made, the cast and crew signed for two sequels to be shot back-to-back,[56] a practical decision on Disney's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew.[53][57] Writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio knew that with an ensemble cast, they weren't free to invent totally different situations and characters, as with the Indiana Jones and James Bond series, and so had to retroactively turn The Curse of the Black Pearl into the first of a trilogy.[58] They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann's embrace at the end of the first film, and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device.[59] They settled on introducing the Flying Dutchman, the Kraken, and Davy Jones's locker, a mythology mentioned twice in the first film. Also only mentioned in the first film, a fictionalized East India Trading Company was introduced as the primary antagonists, which for them represented a counterpoint to the personal freedom represented by pirates,[60] which was represented by a fictionalized Brethren of the Coast.[61] Each of the cast of characters reprise their roles in the Pirates sequels, respectively, and saw the additions of Tom Hollander as Lord Cutler Beckett, Stellan Skarsgård as Bootstrap Bill Turner, Naomie Harris as Tia Dalma, and Bill Nighy as Davy Jones. Further additions include Chow Yun-Fat as Sao Feng and Keith Richards as Jack Sparrow's father, Captain Teague.[61]

In November 2006, near the end of filming the Pirates trilogy, it was reported that Keira Knightley didn't want to participate in any further sequels.[62] Both Knightley and Orlando Bloom had repeatedly been quoted in saying they were done with Pirates, noting that there was closure for Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann in At World's End, was quoted in saying they wanted to move on from the franchise.[63][64][65][66] Whereas Johnny Depp was more interested in returning as Captain Jack Sparrow,[67] having been quoted that it was a "break, or a hiatus" as he wrapped his last day on set.[61]

Filming for the sequels began on February 28, 2005,[68] with Dead Man's Chest finishing on March 1, 2006,[69] and At World's End on January 10, 2007.[70][71] The second film was the first Disney theatrical feature film with the computer-generated Walt Disney Pictures logo.[72]

Fourth film
With the stories of both Will Turner (Orlando Bloom) and Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley) resolved in At World's End,[67] as well as both actors having declined involvement,[63][64][65] this forced a new approach while retaining some of the franchise favorites, particularly Pirates veterans Captain Jack Sparrow (Johnny Depp), Captain Hector Barbossa (Geoffrey Rush), and Joshamee Gibbs (Kevin R. McNally) from the original trilogy. Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio discovered the novel On Stranger Tides by Tim Powers during production of Dead Man's Chest and At World's End, and decided to use it as the basis for a fourth film.[67] As Gore Verbinski was unavailable, Bruckheimer and Depp invited Rob Marshall to direct the film.[73] Elliott and Rossio decided to do a stand-alone sequel,[74] with a story that would support new characters,[75] and incorporate elements from the novel, such as Edward "Blackbeard" Teach, the Fountain of Youth and mermaids—the latter two having been already alluded to in the previous films.[76][67]

Depp, Rush, McNally, Keith Richards, Greg Ellis, and Damian O'Hare returned to their roles from previous films in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides,[77] and the cast saw the additions of Ian McShane as Blackbeard and Penélope Cruz as Angelica, Jack Sparrow's love interest and Blackbeard's daughter.[78] Further additions include Sam Claflin as the missionary Philip Swift, Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey as the mermaid Syrena, Stephen Graham as Scrum, Richard Griffiths as King George II, and Óscar Jaenada as The Spaniard.[67] After the costly production of two simultaneous films, Disney tried to scale down the fourth installment, giving a lower budget,[79] which led to cheaper locations and fewer scenes with special effects.[80] However, with a budget of $378.5 million, On Stranger Tides is one of the most expensive films ever made.[81][82]

Filming for On Stranger Tides began on June 14,[67] and ended on November 19, 2010.[80][83][non-primary source needed] It was also filmed in 3D, with cameras similar to the ones used in Avatar.[73][67] It was released in the United States on May 20, 2011.[84]

Fifth film
In January 2011, Terry Rossio was confirmed to write the screenplay for the fifth installment, but without his co-writer Ted Elliott.[85] Rossio's script was ultimately discarded, and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain, which made actor Johnny Depp "worried that would be redundant to Dark Shadows, which also featured a female villain."[86] Following the film's theatrical release in 2017, Rossio released his unproduced screenplay on his website Wordplay, which includes the proposed story and additional information in extensive footnotes.[87]

In January 2013, Disney hired Jeff Nathanson to write the script for the film. Nathanson's script featured the Trident of Poseidon,[2] loosely based on the Trident of Neptune from Rossio's script.[87] Norwegian directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg were reportedly selected to direct in May 2013.[88] By August 2013, Rønning and Sandberg confirmed their involvement, and praised Nathanson's "funny and touching" script, also being inspired by the first film of the franchise.[89][90] The directing duo also confirmed that the title of the fifth film would be Dead Men Tell No Tales, alluding to the line well known from the theme-park attraction,[91][92][93] and that it would be both a stand-alone adventure and tie into the overall mythology of the series.[94] Disney pushed back the originally announced 2015 release date to a Summer 2016 release.[95][96] Script issues were reportedly behind the delay, as both the studio and filmmakers were reportedly not happy with Nathanson's initial draft, but Bruckheimer revealed Nathanson was at work on a second attempt based on the well-received outline.[97]

Depp, Rush, McNally, Stephen Graham, Martin Klebba, Giles New and Angus Barnett returned to their roles from previous films, and the cast saw the additions of Javier Bardem as the Spanish Navy Captain Armando Salazar, Brenton Thwaites as Henry Turner, and Kaya Scodelario as Carina Smyth. Further additions include Golshifteh Farahani as the sea witch Shansa,[98] David Wenham as Royal Navy Lieutenant John Scarfield,[99][100] and a cameo role by The Beatles musician Paul McCartney as Jack Sparrow's namesake, Uncle Jack.[101] Despite the studio and producer guideline that Keira Knightley and Orlando Bloom would not return,[87] as well as the actors' initial comments about returning to their roles after At World's End,[63][66] Elizabeth Swann and Will Turner returned in cameo appearances in Dead Men Tell No Tales.[102]

The film was shot in Australia after the government agreed to repurpose $20 million of tax incentives originally intended for the remake of 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea.[103] Village Roadshow Studios and Port Douglas were used as filming locations.[104] Production began in Australia on February 17, 2015, and wrapped on July 9.[98][105] Although the scheduled theatrical release was on July 7, 2017,[106][107][108] among other previously announced and subsequently delayed released dates,[95][96] Dead Men Tell No Tales was released on May 26, 2017.[109] The film was also given an alternative title, Salazar's Revenge, for marketing purposes in selected European, South American, and Asian countries.[110]

Reception
Box office performance
Film	U.S. release date	Box office gross	All-time Ranking	Budget	Ref.
North America	Other territories	Worldwide	North America	Worldwide
The Curse of the Black Pearl	July 9, 2003	$305,413,918	$348,850,097	$654,264,015	99	161	$140 million	[111]
Dead Man's Chest	July 7, 2006	$423,315,812	$642,863,913	$1,066,179,725	33	41	$225 million	[112]
At World's End	May 25, 2007	$309,420,425	$651,576,067	$960,996,492	97	60	$300 million	[113]
On Stranger Tides	May 20, 2011	$241,071,802	$804,642,000	$1,045,713,802	157	44	$378.5 million	[81][82]
Dead Men Tell No Tales	May 26, 2017	$172,558,876	$622,322,566	$794,881,442	319	103	$230–320 million	[114][115]
Total	$1,451,780,833	$3,070,254,643	$4,522,035,498	15	15	$1.274–1.364 billion	[116]
The Pirates of the Caribbean film series was successful at the box office, with each film grossing over $650 million, and all but Dead Men Tell No Tales at some point ranking among the fifty highest-grossing films of all time. It became the first ever series to have multiple films passing the billion dollar mark in box office revenues with Dead Man's Chest and On Stranger Tides,[117] since followed by other film franchises.

The Curse of the Black Pearl was the third-highest-grossing 2003 film in North America, behind The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King and Finding Nemo, and fourth worldwide, behind The Return of the King, Finding Nemo and The Matrix Reloaded.[118] Dead Man's Chest was the most successful film of 2006 worldwide.[119] At World's End led the worldwide grosses in 2007, though being only fourth in North America, behind Spider-Man 3, Shrek the Third and Transformers.[120]

On Stranger Tides was the third-highest-grossing film of 2011 worldwide, behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 and Transformers: Dark of the Moon, and the fifth in North America.[121] The first three sequels broke box office records upon release, of which the most notable are the opening-weekend record in North America (Dead Man's Chest),[122] the Memorial-Day weekend record in North America (At World's End)[123] and the opening-weekend record outside North America (On Stranger Tides).[124]

Critical and public response
Each film is linked to the "Critical response" section of its article.
Film	Rotten Tomatoes	Metacritic	CinemaScore[125]
The Curse of the Black Pearl	79% (7.11/10 average rating) (219 reviews)[126]	63 (40 reviews)[127]	A
Dead Man's Chest	53% (5.95/10 average rating) (228 reviews)[128]	53 (37 reviews)[129]	A−
At World's End	44% (5.46/10 average rating) (227 reviews)[130]	50 (36 reviews)[131]	A−
On Stranger Tides	33% (5.02/10 average rating) (276 reviews)[132]	45 (39 reviews)[133]	B+
Dead Men Tell No Tales	30% (4.70/10 average rating) (290 reviews)[134]	39 (45 reviews)[135]	A−
The series is noted for its high quality of acting talent.[136][137][138][139][140][141] The visual and practical effects are considered some of the best ever done on film,[140][141][142][143] so much so that audiences believed certain CGI elements of the films were real and done practically.[144][145][146] However, the plots of the four sequels have received mixed reviews, with the general consensus that they are too bloated and convoluted to follow.[147][148][149][150][151] Pirates of the Caribbean is noted for reinvigorating the pirate film genre after decades of either no pirate films or failed pirate films.[152] The success of the series saw Disney and Jerry Bruckheimer try to replicate the franchise's success by releasing other big budget adventure films such as Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time and The Lone Ranger, the latter of which was directed by Gore Verbinski. Both of them have failed to achieve critical or financial success.[153][154][155][156]

Accolades
Main article: List of accolades received by the Pirates of the Caribbean film series
Academy Awards
Together, the first three films were nominated for a total of 11 Academy Awards, of which a single award was won.

Award	Film
The Curse of the Black Pearl	Dead Man's Chest	At World's End	On Stranger Tides	Dead Men Tell No Tales
Best Actor	Nominated[146][157]
(Johnny Depp)				
Best Art Direction		Nominated[158]			
Best Makeup	Nominated[146][157]		Nominated[159]		
Best Sound Editing	Nominated[146][157]	Nominated[158]			
Best Sound Mixing	Nominated[146][157]	Nominated[158]			
Best Visual Effects	Nominated[146][157]	Won[158]	Nominated[159]		
Golden Globe Awards
Together, all the five films were nominated for a total of 2 Golden Globe Awards, of which neither were won.

Award	Film
The Curse of the Black Pearl	Dead Man's Chest	At World's End	On Stranger Tides	Dead Men Tell No Tales
Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Comedy or Musical	Nominated
(Johnny Depp)	Nominated
(Johnny Depp)			
Golden Raspberry Awards
Award	Film
The Curse of the Black Pearl	Dead Man's Chest	At World's End	On Stranger Tides	Dead Men Tell No Tales
Worst Actor					Nominated
(Johnny Depp)[note 1]
Worst Supporting Actor			Nominated
(Orlando Bloom)		Nominated
(Javier Bardem)[note 1]
Worst Screen Combo					Nominated
(Johnny Depp)[note 1]
MTV Movie Awards
Together, all the first three films were nominated for a total of 13 MTV Movie Awards, of which 4 were won.

Award	Film
The Curse of the Black Pearl	Dead Man's Chest	At World's End	On Stranger Tides	Dead Men Tell No Tales
Best Movie	Nominated	Won	Nominated		
Best Male Performance	Won
(Johnny Depp)	Won
(Johnny Depp)			
Best Female Performance		Nominated
(Keira Knightley)	Nominated
(Keira Knightley)		
Best Breakthrough Female Performance	Nominated
(Keira Knightley)				
Best On-Screen Team	Nominated
(Johnny Depp & Orlando Bloom)				
Best Villain	Nominated
(Geoffrey Rush)	Nominated
(Bill Nighy)			
Best Comedic Performance	Nominated
(Johnny Depp)		Won
(Johnny Depp)		
Teen Choice Awards
Together, the first four films were nominated for a total of 32 Teen Choice Awards, of which 17 were won.

Award	Film
The Curse of the Black Pearl	Dead Man's Chest	At World's End	On Stranger Tides	Dead Men Tell No Tales
Choice Movie: Chemistry	Won
(Orlando Bloom & Keira Knightley)				
Choice Movie: Fight/Action Sequence	Won
(Johnny Depp vs Geoffrey Rush)				
Choice Movie: Liar	Won
(Johnny Depp)				
Choice Movie: Liplock	Won
(Orlando Bloom & Keira Knightley)	Won
(Orlando Bloom & Keira Knightley)			Nominated
(Orlando Bloom & Keira Knightley)
Choice Movie: Female Breakout Star	Nominated
(Keira Knightley)				
Choice Movie Actor		Won
(Johnny Depp)	Won
(Johnny Depp)	Nominated
(Johnny Depp)	Nominated
(Johnny Depp)
Nominated
(Orlando Bloom)	Nominated
(Orlando Bloom)	Nominated
(Brenton Thwaites)
Choice Summer Movie		Won			Nominated
Choice Movie: Scream		Won
(Keira Knightley)			
Choice Movie		Won	Won	Nominated	Nominated
Choice Movie: Rumble		Won
(Orlando Bloom & Jack Davenport)	Won
(Orlando Bloom)		
Choice Movie: Hissy Fit		Won
(Keira Knightley)			
Choice Male Hottie		Nominated
(Orlando Bloom)			
Choice Movie Actress		Nominated
(Keira Knightley)	Won
(Keira Knightley)	Nominated
(Penélope Cruz)	Nominated
(Kaya Scodelario)
Choice Movie: Villain		Won
(Bill Nighy)	Won
(Bill Nighy)	Nominated
(Ian McShane)	Nominated
(Javier Bardem)
Music
Main article: Music of the Pirates of the Caribbean film series
Soundtracks
Title	U.S. release date	Length	Label
Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (Original Soundtrack)	July 22, 2003	43:50	Walt Disney Records
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (Soundtrack from the Motion Picture)	July 4, 2006	58:32
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (Soundtrack from the Motion Picture)	May 22, 2007	55:50
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (Soundtrack from the Motion Picture)	May 17, 2011	77:11
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (Soundtrack from the Motion Picture)	May 25, 2017	75:20
See also
icon	Disney portal
List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members
Notes
 Referred to as Pirates of the Caribbean XIII: Dead Careers Tell No Tales on the official nomination list.
References
 "Johnny Depp Movies List by Box Office Sales". JohnnyDeppMoviesList.org. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2015.
 Rebecca Ford (February 17, 2015). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Plot, Casting Announced as Production Begins". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 20, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2015.
 Nugent, John (June 1, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean 5: Ten Revelations From Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". Empire. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved August 19, 2021.
 "Exclusive: Disney will set sail for 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 5 & 6 back-to-back". Archived from the original on March 7, 2017. Retrieved March 7, 2017.
 "Pirates 5 May Not Be Captain Jack's Final Adventure". March 4, 2017. Archived from the original on March 7, 2017.
 Zinski, Dan (September 4, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean 6 Isn't Green-Lit Yet". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 Leadbeater, Alex (October 2, 2017). "Exclusive: Kaya Scodelario Contracted To Return for Pirates of the Caribbean 6". ScreenRant. Archived from the original on June 2, 2020. Retrieved July 16, 2019.
 "Everything to Know About 'Pirates of the Caribbean 6': Cast, Release Date and More". US Weekly. August 17, 2022. Archived from the original on May 28, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023.
 Gonzalez, Umberto (October 25, 2019). "Craig Mazin and Ted Elliott to Develop New 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Movie". The Wrap. Archived from the original on November 14, 2022. Retrieved May 29, 2023 – via Yahoo! Life.
 McNary, Dave (October 25, 2019). "'Chernobyl' Creator Craig Mazin to Develop 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved September 29, 2022.
 Drew Taylor (May 14, 2020). "Jerry Bruckheimer Unsure of Johnny Depp's Involvement in New 'Pirates' Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2020.
 Deloss, John (April 20, 2022). "Johnny Depp Would Turn Down $300M From Disney To Return For Pirates 6". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 20, 2022.
 Maddeus, Gene (April 20, 2022). "Johnny Depp: Disney Wanted to Cut Ties on 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 'To Be Safe'". Variety. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022.
 Watel, Stephanie (February 20, 2023). "Orlando Bloom Eager to Return as Will Turner for Pirates of the Caribbean 6". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 "Would Pirates of The Caribbean's Orlando Bloom Return To The Franchise?". Yahoo! Finance. February 20, 2023. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 Hurtado, Alexandra (February 17, 2023). "Exclusive! Orlando Bloom on Final Season of 'Carnival Row'—and Possibly Revisiting 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". Parade. Archived from the original on March 27, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2023.
 "Keira Knightley Reacts to Returning to 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Franchise". Entertainment Tonight. March 14, 2023. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 "Jerry Bruckheimer 'Would Love' to Bring Johnny Depp Back for In-the-Works 'Pirates' Sequel". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 "Jerry Bruckheimer on Bringing Johnny Depp Back to Pirates Franchise". YouTube. March 12, 2023. Archived from the original on April 23, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 Andersson, Eric; Juneau, Jen; Triggs, Charlotte (July 6, 2023). "Johnny Depp Open to Working with Disney After Feeling Betrayed: 'Anything Is Possible' (Exclusive Source)". People. Archived from the original on September 30, 2023. Retrieved September 30, 2023.
 Riefe, Jordan (August 19, 2023). "Craig Mazin has next season's 'Last of Us' in his head. If only the strike would settle". Los Angeles Times.
 Ankers-Range, Adele (March 26, 2024). "Pirates of the Caribbean Producer Confirms Franchise Is Getting a 'Reboot' With Sixth Movie". IGN. Retrieved March 26, 2024.
 "Jerry Bruckheimer on 'Top Gun 3', 'Pirates' Reboot and Brad Pitt Formula 1 Racing Flick (Exclusive)".
 Romano, Nick (May 20, 2024). "Pirates of the Caribbean producer hopes to make both reboot and Margot Robbie film (exclusive)". Entertainment Weekly.
 Siegel, Tatiana (December 4, 2024). "Disney Got Its Groove Back With 'Moana 2,' but Troubled 'Snow White' Could Halt the Momentum". Variety. Retrieved February 13, 2025.
 Mia Galuppo (June 26, 2020). "Margot Robbie, Christina Hodson Re-Team for New 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Movie for Disney". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 11, 2021. Retrieved June 26, 2020.
 Sharf, Zack (November 14, 2022). "Margot Robbie Says Her Female-Led 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Movie Is Dead at Disney: 'I Guess They Don't Want to Do It'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2022.
 Tangonan, EJ (November 14, 2022). "Margot Robbie says her Pirates of the Caribbean movie is no longer going forward". JoBlo.com. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2022.
 Oddo, Marco Vito (December 2, 2022). "Female-Led 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Could Resurface in the Future Says Jerry Bruckheimer [Exclusive]". Collider. Archived from the original on December 16, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022.
 "Jerry Bruckheimer on Career, 'Maverick' Success, and 'Pirates' Sequels". The Hollywood Reporter. December 19, 2022. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022.
 Hibberd, James (December 19, 2022). "Jerry Bruckheimer on Career, Top Gun: Maverick, Sequels". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 23, 2022.
 "Ayo Edebiri reportedly replacing Johnny Depp in Pirates of the Caribbean films". news.com.au.
 Bumbray, Chris (February 9, 2024). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Elon Musk weighs in on debunked rumor The Bear's Ayo Edebiri could replace Depp - JoBlo".
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 6: Is Ayo Edebiri Replacing Johnny Depp's Jack Sparrow?". Yahoo Entertainment. February 8, 2024.
 Jim Byrkit. "Wedlocked on Jim Byrkit's portfolio". Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014.
 "bio". October 22, 2009. Archived from the original on October 22, 2009.
 Rossio, Terry (July 25, 2023). "Re: Tales of the Code: Wedlocked...Pirate Belles?". Wordplayer.com.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Tales of the Code: Wedlocked". D23. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved March 27, 2023.
 Cavna, Michael (July 15, 2011). "As a creative renaissance man, writer-director James Ward Byrkit brings 'RANGO' and 'PIRATES' film to your screen". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012. Retrieved April 15, 2018.
 Charting the Course: Creating Cutthroat Island (2023) - Studiocanal
 "Independent Filmmakers Network : Shooting People". shootingpeople.org. Retrieved October 12, 2023.
 "The little-known Aussie screenwriter behind some of Hollywood's most well-known blockbusters". ABC News. July 26, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2023.
 Interviewing Stuart Beattie, screenwriter of "Pirates of the Caribbean" & "Collateral.", June 24, 2022, retrieved October 12, 2023
 Gerard Raiti (July 11, 2003). "ILM and Disney Make Pirate Perfection". VFXWorld. Archived from the original on October 7, 2007. Retrieved May 14, 2007.
 Pirates of the Caribbean presskit Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine, accessed 2006-12-09
 Stax (June 25, 2003). "Depp & Bruckheimer Talk Pirates". IGN. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved May 13, 2007.
 Greg Dean Schmitz. "Greg's Previews — Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on December 9, 2006. Retrieved May 13, 2007.
 Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio, Stuart Beattie, Jay Wolpert (2003). Audio Commentary. Buena Vista.
 Gore Verbinski, Johnny Depp (2003). Audio Commentary. Buena Vista.
 Caroline Westbrook (August 8, 2003). "Pirates films tests its stars". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved May 13, 2007.
 "Exclusive Interview: Actor Greg Ellis sails into PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: ON STRANGER TIDES - Assignment X". May 30, 2011.
 "Exclusive Interview: Jerry Bruckheimer". Moviehole. May 21, 2007. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 James B. Stewart (2005). DisneyWar. New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-684-80993-1.
 Jim Hill (May 17, 2007). "Why For: did Michael Eisner try and shut down production of "The Curse of the Black Pearl" back in 2002?". Jim Hill Media. Archived from the original on February 8, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2008.
 Chris Nashawaty. "How Pirates fits into Johnny Depp's quirky career". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 Linder, Brian (October 21, 2003). "Back-to-Back Pirates". IGN. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007.
 According to Plan: The Harrowing and True Story of Dead Man's Chest. Buena Vista. 2006.
 Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio (2006). Audio Commentary. Buena Vista.
 Charting the Return. Buena Vista. 2006.
 "Everything Relates Back to What Started Everything Off in the First". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 "At World's End Press Kit" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on August 21, 2010. Retrieved August 19, 2022.
 "Keira Talks Pirates Future". IGN. November 10, 2006.
 "Orlando Bloom Says He's All Done With 'Pirates,' 'Lord Of The Rings'". MTV. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023.
 "Orlando Bloom 'turns down Pirates 4'". Digital Spy. July 27, 2009.
 Orlando Bloom Won't Return For 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' - MTV Movies Blog - Archive
 "Three Pirates enough for Keira". Irish Independent. March 22, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" (PDF). Disney Enterprises, Inc. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 31, 2012. Retrieved November 14, 2022.
 "Los Angeles: The Voyage Begins". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Chapter 7 – Return to The Bahamas". Production Notes. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Aloha Oe: Hawaii Farewell". Production Notes. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 "Movies" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2010.
 Sheigh Crabtree (July 10, 2006). "Old Disney magic in new animated logo". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 18, 2006. Retrieved January 14, 2013.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Producer Jerry Bruckheimer On Set Interview". Collider. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. p. 2. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Screenwriter Terry Rossio On Set Interview: Pirates of the Caribbean 4: On Stranger Tides". Collider. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Movie Interview – Bruckheimer on Pirates of the Caribbean 4". IGN. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on July 4, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Ditzian, Eric (March 19, 2010). "Exclusive: Penelope Cruz To Play Johnny Depp's Love Interest In New 'Pirates'". MTV Movie News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
 Stewart, Andrew (May 19, 2011). "Fourth try aims to stir high 'Tides' at B.O." Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 Eller, Claudia; Chmielewski, Dawn C. (May 3, 2010). "Not even Bruckheimer movies can escape budget cuts". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012.
 Sylt, Christian (July 22, 2014). "Fourth Pirates Of The Caribbean Is Most Expensive Movie Ever With Costs Of $410 Million". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 7, 2014. Production costs: $410.6 million; rebate: $32.1 million
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2020.
 @Bruckheimerjb (November 19, 2010). "Officially wrapped Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides this week. Excited to share trailer with you 12/17. Stay tuned..." (Tweet). Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2011 – via Twitter.
 Sarafin, Jarrod (January 7, 2010). "PIRATES 4 Sails May 2011". Mania.com. Archived from the original on January 10, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2011.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 14, 2011). "Disney Sets Terry Rossio To Script Fifth 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Installment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 Rossio, Terry (August 7, 2016). "Wordplay/Columns/55. "Time Risk" by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 "PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES by Terry Rossio". www.wordplayer.com.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 29, 2013). "'Kon-Tiki' Helmers Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg Land 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2013.
 Billy Donnelly (August 28, 2013). "Interview: KON-TIKI Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". This Is Infamous. Archived from the original on July 6, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 "'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5' Directors Tease 'Dead Men' Sequel". MTV News. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 Title Revealed!". ComingSoon.net. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5's Official Title Released". VH1. August 27, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2013.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' title revealed – Movies News". Digital Spy. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 "Exclusive: And The Title Of PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN 5 Will Be…". August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 24, 2013.
 Mike Fleming Jr (September 10, 2013). "Disney Delays Voyage Of 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'; Eyeing 2016". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Delayed; 2016 Release Likely". ComingSoon.net. September 10, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 Masters, Kim (December 16, 2013). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Delayed Beyond Summer 2015". the Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016. Retrieved September 10, 2013.
 Vejvoda, Jim (February 17, 2015). "Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Begins Production". IGN. Archived from the original on February 18, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015.
 Han, Angie (August 15, 2015). "Orlando Bloom Officially Confirmed for 'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' [D23 Expo 2015]". /Film. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved August 25, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales | Pirates of the Caribbean". May 31, 2017. Archived from the original on May 31, 2017.
 Alexander, Bryan (May 31, 2017). "Paul McCartney went too pirate for 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved January 23, 2018.
 Spencer, Anthony (September 14, 2021). "Here's Why Orland Bloom Skipped Out On 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 4'". TheThings. Retrieved May 5, 2022.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 gets green light to shoot in Australia". The Guardian. September 1, 2014. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
 Bochenski, Natalie (October 2, 2014). "Pirates of the Caribbean movie confirmed to film in Queensland". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on October 2, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5′ Begins Production in Australia". February 18, 2015. Archived from the original on April 24, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5: Dead Men Tell No Tales Given 2017 Release Date". US Weekly. July 24, 2014. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved August 24, 2014.
 "Raise a Black Flag! A New Pirates of the Caribbean Film Is Coming | Disney Insider". Disney. July 23, 2014. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 McClintock, Pamela (July 23, 2014). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Set for Summer 2017". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 20, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2014.
 "'Star Wars: Episode VIII' Sets Off Release Date Dominoes; Rubs Against 'Ready Player One' – Will Spielberg Pic Move?". Deadline Hollywood. January 20, 2016. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved January 20, 2016.
 Nugent, John (June 1, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean 5: Ten Revelations From Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved July 16, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2020.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2020.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2020.
 "2017 Feature Film Study" (PDF). FilmL.A. August 2018. p. 25. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved February 27, 2021.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021.
 "Franchises". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022.
 "Showdowns: 'Pirates' Vs. 'Pirates'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved September 23, 2011.
 "2003 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved March 15, 2008.
 "2006 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 30, 2007. Retrieved March 15, 2008.
 "2007 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 27, 2007. Retrieved March 15, 2008.
 "2011 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 2, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2011.
 "'Pirates' raid record books". Box Office Mojo. July 10, 2006. Archived from the original on September 11, 2007. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
 "Third 'Pirates' Sacks Memorial Record". Box Office Mojo. May 29, 2007. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2007.
 Subers, Ray (May 24, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Pirates' Sails to New Overseas Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2012.
 "CinemaScore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2022.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 19, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003)". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". Metacritic. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved March 9, 2021.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2021.
 Morrison, Alan (August 8, 2003). "Empire's Pirates Of The Caribbean: The Curse Of The Black Pearl Movie Review". Empire. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012. Retrieved August 9, 2003.
 Ebert, Roger (July 9, 2003). "Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl". rogerebert.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014.
 Jolin, Dan (July 6, 2006). "Empire's Pirates Of The Caribbean Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest Movie Review". Empire. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2006.
 "Total Film – Pirates Of The Caribbean: At World's End". Total Film. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007.
 Roeper, Richard. "Pirates of the Caribbean 3: At World's End (2007; Rated PG-13)". richardroeper.com. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014.
 Barker, Andrew (May 12, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Variety. Archived from the original on July 17, 2012. Retrieved May 13, 2011.
 Bennett, Ray (May 10, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides: Review". Variety. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 Gilchrist, Todd (November 15, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End DVD Review". IGN. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012.
 Breimeier, Russ (July 7, 2006). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". ChristianityToday.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End – Review". The New York Times. July 7, 2005.
 "The 76th Academy Awards (2004) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on September 29, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2011.
 Lowry, Brian (May 23, 2007). "Review: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007.
 "Review: Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". ReelViews. May 23, 2007. Archived from the original on June 8, 2012.
 Graham, Adam (May 25, 2017). "Review: 'Dead Men Tell No Tales' sinks Depp, 'Pirates'". The Detroit News. Archived from the original on June 8, 2017.
 Kermode, Mark (May 20, 2011). "Mark Kermode savages new Pirates Of The Caribbean film". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 21, 2011.
 Goodykoontz, Bill (May 18, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides', 2 stars". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 Hamilton, John (January 10, 2007). Pirates in the Media. ABDO Publishing Company. ISBN 9781617843198. Archived from the original on July 9, 2023. Retrieved November 19, 2020.
 "'Prince of Persia' weaker than hoped for in foreign debut". Los Angeles Times. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on January 27, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2020.
 "Prince of Persia: The Sands of Times reviews at Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on December 1, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2010.
 "The Lone Ranger (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved July 28, 2016.
 Shaw, Lucas (August 6, 2013). "'The Lone Ranger' to Cost Disney $160–$190M in Q4". The Wrap. Archived from the original on August 10, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2013.
 "76th Academy Award Winners". Blackflix.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
 "Nominees & Winners for the 79th Academy Awards". Academy Awards. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
 "The 80th Academy Awards (2008) Nominees and Winners". Academy Awards. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
External links
Official website
vte
Pirates of the Caribbean
vte
Disney franchises and series
vte
Disney theme park adaptations
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
United StatesIsrael
Categories: Pirates of the Caribbean (film series)Film series introduced in 2003Fiction set in the 18th centuryAdventure film seriesComedy film seriesAction film seriesDisney film series
This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 01:22 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean (film series)

54 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Casting
Filming
Post-production
Music
Marketing
Release

Theatrical
Home media
Terry Rossio's screenplay
Reception

Box office
United States and Canada
Other territories
Critical response
Accolades
Future
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Pirates of the Caribbean:
Dead Men Tell No Tales

Theatrical release poster
Directed by	
Joachim Rønning
Espen Sandberg
Screenplay by	Jeff Nathanson
Story by	
Jeff Nathanson
Terry Rossio
Based on	
Characters
by Ted Elliott
    Terry Rossio
    Stuart Beattie
    Jay Wolpert
Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	
Johnny Depp
Javier Bardem
Brenton Thwaites
Kaya Scodelario
Kevin McNally
Geoffrey Rush
Cinematography	Paul Cameron[1]
Edited by	
Roger Barton
Leigh Folsom Boyd
Music by	Geoff Zanelli
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release dates	
May 11, 2017 (Shanghai Disney Resort)
May 26, 2017 (United States)
Running time	129 minutes[2]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$230–320 million[3][4][5]
Box office	$795.9 million[6]
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (released internationally as Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge) is a 2017 American swashbuckler fantasy film directed by Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, and written by Jeff Nathanson from a story credited to both Nathanson and executive producer Terry Rossio. It is the fifth film in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series, following On Stranger Tides (2011) as a standalone sequel, and stars an ensemble cast inluding Johnny Depp, Javier Bardem, Geoffrey Rush, Brenton Thwaites, Kaya Scodelario, and Kevin McNally. Its story follows a search for the Trident of Poseidon by a down-on-his-luck Captain Jack Sparrow pursued by Captain Armando Salazar and a crew of deadly ghosts who have escaped from the Devil's Triangle, determined to kill every pirate at sea and take revenge on Sparrow.

Development of the film started shortly before On Stranger Tides was released in May 2011, with Rossio writing the initial script, and Depp being involved in the writing process. In early 2013, Nathanson was hired to write a new script, while Rønning and Sandberg became involved in the project shortly afterward. The filmmakers cited the series' first installment, The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003), as inspiration for the script and tone of the film. Initially planned for a 2015 release, the film was delayed to 2016 and then to 2017, due to script and budget issues. Principal photography started in Australia in February 2015, after the Australian government offered Disney $20 million in tax incentives, and ended that July. With an estimated production budget of $230–320 million, it is among the most expensive films ever made.

Dead Men Tell No Tales premiered at the Shanghai Disney Resort on May 11, 2017, and was released in the United States on May 26. The film received generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $795.9 million worldwide.

Plot
Over twelve years after Will Turner first leaves Elizabeth Swann aboard the Flying Dutchman,[a] he is visited by their twelve-year-old son, Henry. Will is still bound to the Dutchman and can step on land once a decade, but Henry says that he can be freed from his curse by the Trident of Poseidon. Although his father tells him to accept his fate, Henry intends to recruit pirate Captain Jack Sparrow to help find the Trident.

Nine years later, Henry is aboard a British Navy ship, which sails into the supernatural Devil's Triangle and comes across the ghost ship Silent Mary. The sailors in Henry's ship are slaughtered by ghosts led by Spanish pirate-hunter, Captain Armando Salazar, who leaves Henry as the sole survivor so that he can deliver a message of revenge to Jack Sparrow. Jack, as a young pirate,[b] had tricked Salazar into entering the Triangle, causing his death but also inadvertently cursing his ship and crew as the undead.

On Saint Martin, young astronomer Carina Smyth is sentenced to death for witchcraft but escapes and crosses paths with Jack, who has been suffering from a spell of bad luck, as his pirate crew botches a bank robbery. Jack later trades his compass for a drink, an act that destroys the Devil's Triangle and frees Salazar's ghostly crew to seek revenge. Carina learns Henry is looking for the Trident's location and offers to help him using her unknown father's diary. Upon their arrests, Carina and Jack stall the execution process, but they escape with the help of Henry and Jack's crew. They all set sail on the Dying Gull, where Carina deciphers the clues in her diary, discovering that the stars will lead to an island where the Trident is hidden.

Meanwhile, Captain Hector Barbossa is informed that Salazar has attacked three pirate ships of Barbossa's fleet. Shansa, a sea witch, tells Barbossa that the Trident could lead him to a "treasure" and gives him Jack's compass. Barbossa makes a deal with Salazar by offering to help find Jack. Salazar pursues the Dying Gull, forcing Jack, Henry, and Carina to flee to an island, discovering that Salazar's crew cannot go on land. Barbossa allies himself with Jack, returning his compass, restoring the miniaturized Black Pearl[c] to its original size, and taking command of the Pearl once more as they continue their journey to the Trident's island. During the voyage, Jack and Barbossa realize Carina is the latter's long-lost daughter.

The Pearl approaches the Trident's island and evades a British Navy warship until it is destroyed by the Silent Mary before the Pearl runs aground on the island. Jack, Barbossa, and Carina use the island's magic to part the ocean which opens a path to the Trident on the ocean floor. Salazar captures Henry and possesses him to walk on the ocean floor and seize the Trident. Once he does so, Henry is given his body back, and Jack distracts Salazar, allowing Henry to destroy the Trident, breaking all curses upon the sea and restoring Salazar's crew to life. However, the Trident's destruction causes the divided sea to close in on them. The Pearl lowers its anchor to lift the group to safety, but Salazar pursues them.

Carina realizes that Barbossa is her father when she spots a tattoo on Barbossa's arm, the Trident's star formation, identical to the diary's cover. Barbossa sacrifices himself to kill Salazar, allowing the others to escape. Shortly afterwards, Carina names herself "Barbossa" before Henry and Carina go to Port Royal, Jamaica. Henry and Carina kiss before Henry reunites with Will, now free from the Dutchman, on land. Will then hugs and kisses Elizabeth Swann immediately afterwards. After watching the reunion from aboard the Black Pearl, Sparrow adopts Barbossa's monkey "Jack" before sailing away into the horizon.

In a post-credits scene, Will and Elizabeth are asleep in a bedroom when the shadow of Davy Jones enters. When the figure moves closer with his claw, Will wakes up to see nobody in the room. Assuming it was a nightmare, Will turns toward his wife and goes back to sleep, unaware of the barnacles lying on the floor next to the bed.[d]

Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members and characters
Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow:
A down-on-his-luck pirate and captain of the Black Pearl, which is now trapped in a bottle, who travels with Henry and Carina in search of the Trident of Poseidon to defeat an old nemesis, Captain Salazar.[11][12][13] Rønning wanted to focus on relatable characters, as in the first film, "where Jack is not the [lead ... but] comes in and crashes the party every now and then,"[14] and to make use of Depp's "comedic genius".[15] The film examines Jack's backstory, with the young Jack portrayed by Anthony De La Torre,[16] whose face was replaced by a CGI replica of Depp as he looked in 21 Jump Street and What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993).[17] Rønning felt de-aging Depp was tricky against the canon of the franchise.[18]
Javier Bardem as Captain Armando Salazar:
Once the greatest pirate hunter who ever roamed the seas as Captain of the Silent Mary for the Spanish Navy,[13] an old nemesis of Jack Sparrow, now a cursed ghost commanding a crew of undead soldiers who escape from the Devil's Triangle, seeking revenge on Jack Sparrow and determined to kill every pirate at sea.[1] "He's a little supernatural. He's on a real mission of vengeance for something Jack did to him when he was 18. He's a pretty nasty character."[7] Bardem set out to imbue the character with "a rage based on dented pride," owing to his spectacular fall, from a high-ranking commander of a Spanish fleet to being betrayed and trapped in hell by Jack.[19] With Salazar's body language, he tried to convey a bull in an arena, "full of rage and need of vengeance, but also wounded."[20] It took three hours a day to apply the make-up, which Bardem referred to as having "cold chicken breasts" glued to his face.[21]
Geoffrey Rush as Captain Hector Barbossa:
Sparrow's rival, the former Captain of the Black Pearl, and the Captain of the Queen Anne's Revenge.[1][13] On the character's role of having settled into a growing and prosperous pirate empire, Rush said, "Barbossa has become extremely wealthy. He's got more money than he can deal with and he's not a guy of high taste. He's running a very big empire, maybe 10 or 12 ships, so he's the kingpin."[22][23]
Brenton Thwaites as Henry Turner:
The son of Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann who vows to break his father's curse by searching for the Trident.[1][13][24] The directors were keen to draft a new protagonist relationship with Henry and Carina, stating that "in the middle of a big action scene, you need to be able to lean on the characters and find the heart of that story, and channel the characters' vulnerability." Rønning noted that identity is a major theme in the film, and to Henry and Carina's story arc: "they are on a similar quest and find common ground in looking for who they are."[15] Bruckheimer also said the film recaptured the spirit of the first film after they previewed the picture, as well as how Will's son [Thwaites] and the "search for his father" was the backbone of the story.[7] Lewis McGowan is credited as 12-Year-Old Henry.[25]
Kaya Scodelario as Carina Smyth:
A headstrong, altruistic astronomer who was wrongly accused of being a witch.[1][13] Scodelario explained the character's motivation and role, saying, "she is an academic, she's fighting for the right to study at university because women couldn't at that time."[26] For the directors, it was important to "modernise it with Henry and Carina, Kaya, especially brought that with her. She's a modern woman."[14] Scodelario worked with scriptwriter Jeff Nathanson to ensure the character was unique to the series[19] and not a copy of Elizabeth Swann.[27] She said that female characters often "fall into two camps; they are either pretty and perfectly put together or completely insane. Carina has definitely got a little bit of both."[19]
Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: Captain Jack's loyal friend and first mate.[1][13]
Supporting characters appearing in the film include: David Wenham as Lieutenant John Scarfield, a Royal Navy officer who commands HMS Essex;[28] and Golshifteh Farahani as Shansa, a sea witch who helps Barbossa and Scarfield.[1] Stephen Graham, Martin Klebba, Giles New, and Angus Barnett reprise their roles as Scrum, Marty, and Murtogg and Mullroy, respectively, from previous films, as the members of the pirate crews of Jack Sparrow and Hector Barbossa.[1][29] Adam Brown, Danny Kirrane, and Delroy Atkinson appear as members of Sparrow's crew.[30] In the prison scene, Paul McCartney briefly appears as Uncle Jack, Jack Sparrow's uncle and namesake,[31] though the character was named after McCartney's own uncle, John "Jack" McCartney.[12] Jacob Elordi appeared as an extra in the film, portraying one of Saint Martin's redcoats.[32]

Orlando Bloom reprises his role as Will Turner, a blacksmith-turned-pirate who became the Captain of the Flying Dutchman at the end of At World's End (2007).[33][34] Bloom wore barnacle prosthetics for the role,[35] reflecting Turner's status as the cursed Captain of the Dutchman.[13] Keira Knightley briefly appears at the end in a non-speaking role as Elizabeth Swann, Will's wife and Henry's mother,[13][36] following the "demand" that the character be added after test screenings.[37] A CGI silhouette of Davy Jones is seen in the post-credits scene, but actor Bill Nighy stated that he had not been informed about the character's appearance.[38]

Production
Development
Shortly before the release of On Stranger Tides, the cast and crew of the fourth film were told to set aside time in the near future, because Walt Disney Pictures intended to shoot a fifth and sixth film back-to-back.[39] However, it was later stated that only a fifth film was in the works, with Terry Rossio writing a script for a fifth film without his partner Ted Elliott.[40] Rob Marshall was rumoured to return to direct,[41] but declined after choosing to direct Into the Woods (2014).[42] After Marshall passed on the film, many directors were rumored to take over.[43] Gore Verbinski, who was responsible for the original three films, felt that "there's no reason other than financial" in making the film.[44] The eventual shortlist included Fredrik Bond, Rupert Sanders, and the eventual choice, Norwegian film duo Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg.[45] The studio chose them based on their Academy Award-nominated high-sea film Kon-Tiki, and their ability to work with a limited budget.[46]

Rossio's script was discarded in 2012, and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain, which made actor Johnny Depp "worried that it would be redundant to Dark Shadows, which also featured a female villain."[47] In January 2013, Disney hired Jeff Nathanson to work on a script.[48] Nathanson's script featured the Trident of Poseidon,[1] loosely based on the Trident of Neptune from Rossio's unproduced screenplay.[8] Rønning and Sandberg said they were particularly moved by Nathanson's "funny and touching" script,[49] which convinced them to sign to direct in May,[50] Rønning believing that the script was "all there" but needed scenes to "carry the tradition of Gore Verbinski, bring the emotional core and big action set pieces."[15] In August, Rønning and Sandberg revealed that the title would be Dead Men Tell No Tales,[51] and that it would be both a stand-alone adventure and tie into the overall mythology of the series.[52] In the following month, producer Jerry Bruckheimer said, "We have an outline everyone loves but the script is not done," explaining that the release would be postponed beyond summer 2015.[46] The studio questioned Depp's bankability following the financial losses of The Lone Ranger (2013),[53] and the screenplay's first drafts were not approved by Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn, who was concerned about the finished product.[54] Bruckheimer revealed that script and budget issues were behind the delay, and that Nathanson was at work on a second draft, based on a well-received outline, saying they needed a script and budget everyone would approve.[46] Depp was also invited to collaborate on the script, with the actor believing it would be the last of the franchise and wanting to end it right.[55] After the script was accepted, the film was officially green-lit by Disney in July 2014, with a planned release on July 7, 2017.[56]

The directors were inspired by the first film, The Curse of the Black Pearl,[49] stating that the original is thrilling but above all a comedy with heart, and wanted to reinvent the "structure and the dynamics between the characters." In addition to recapturing the best of previous franchise installments, the directors had the works of Charlie Chaplin and Buster Keaton in mind when crafting the tone of the film.[15] The pair wanted the film to be the "most emotional" of the series, and to explore the roots of Jack Sparrow.[57] They decided to use Jack's compass as the "key to unlock Salazar from his hellish prison in the Triangle," and toned down some of the fantastic elements "to ground it, even in Pirates Of The Caribbean [sic]."[58] Geoffrey Rush argued that the pair brought "Euro sensibility to traditional Hollywood franchise thinking,"[59] while Orlando Bloom believed that they had "recaptured the simplicity and charm" of the original film.[60] Bruckheimer also said the film recaptured the spirit of the first film after they previewed the picture, as well as how Will Turner's son and the "search for his father" was the backbone of the story.[7] Kaya Scodelario said that the producers wanted to take the franchise back to its origins, with a story that gave characters a conclusion while opening new possibilities.[61] Along with the directors and writers, many of the crew members were new to the franchise, replacing those who had served on the previous four films, with the exception of Bruckheimer, costume designer Penny Rose, and executive producer Chad Oman.[1][62]

Casting
Speaking at the On Stranger Tides press launch in Cannes, Depp said he would play the role so long as it is popular with the public.[63] By August 2012, news surfaced that Depp had signed for the fifth film, earning A$90 million to reprise his role.[11] One month later, Penélope Cruz stated that in spite of her enjoying playing Angelica in On Stranger Tides, she had not been contacted regarding a fifth film.[64] Geoffrey Rush had commented on returning as Hector Barbossa in the fifth installment, saying "If they keep shapeshifting this character, absolutely," and implied that he might return as the villain.[65] Other co-stars from the previous film include Sam Claflin as Philip Swift,[66] Astrid Berges-Frisbey as Syrena[67] and Greg Ellis as Theodore Groves, even though Groves appeared to have died in On Stranger Tides.[68] In October 2012, Keith Richards expressed interest in reprising his role as Captain Teague,[69] but was unavailable by the time the film went into production.[31]


Javier Bardem was cast to play the role of Captain Salazar. His wife, Penélope Cruz, had starred in the previous instalment of the franchise as Angelica.
On December 2, 2013, it was reported that Christoph Waltz was in talks to appear as the film's main antagonist,[70] but he later declined. The villain was eventually portrayed by Cruz's husband, Javier Bardem.[71] In 2014, Bardem signed on to portray the ghostly Armando Salazar of the Spanish Navy, who in Nathanson's early scripts was referred to as the ghostly Captain John Brand of the British Navy.[1] Bardem had liked the working environment of the fourth movie, which he witnessed accompanying his wife, and stated he was also a fan of the franchise and of Depp's performance as Jack Sparrow.[72] Australian actor Brenton Thwaites entered talks for the role of Henry in late November 2014,[73] after Disney chose him over Taron Egerton, George MacKay, Mitchell Hope, Ansel Elgort, and Sam Keeley.[74]

Kaya Scodelario was chosen as the female lead out of a shortlist that included Gabriella Wilde, Alexandra Dowling, Jenna Thiam, and Lucy Boynton.[75] Her character, Carina, is an astronomer accused of being a witch. Scodelario confirmed that she was playing "a totally different character" from Keira Knightley's Elizabeth Swann, and also that she will be Henry's love interest,[27][76] given in earlier drafts she was envisioned as a love interest of Sparrow.[77] Kevin McNally confirmed his return as Joshamee Gibbs in late January.[29] Adam Brown, Delroy Atkinson, and Danny Kirrane were revealed as cast members shortly before filming.[30] As filming begun, two actors from the previous films were confirmed to return, Martin Klebba as Marty[78] and Stephen Graham as Scrum.[1] Keith Richards previously expressed interest in reprising his role as Captain Teague,[69] but due to Richards being unavailable, Depp invited Paul McCartney to appear as Uncle Jack, Jack Sparrow's uncle and namesake,[31] though the character was named after McCartney's own uncle, John "Jack" McCartney.[12]

Orlando Bloom and Keira Knightley stated in 2007 they didn't want to return as Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann, noting the closure of their characters in At World's End, and have been repeatedly quoted in saying they wanted to move on from the Pirates franchise by 2010.[79][80] While Knightley affirmed this over the years,[81][82] Bloom made statements about returning as early as October 2011.[83] In 2012, Moviehole.Net reported that a "separate Disney contact" gave this one-line response: "Will Turner's story might not be finished..."[84] By 2014, Bloom commented that while he was not sure whether he would return as Will Turner, there were talks and indicated that Disney could make a soft reboot with the franchise and focus on Will and his son.[35] Both Will Turner's return and Bloom's participation was kept secret until the Disney D23 in 2015, after filming had wrapped.[85] Despite having previously stated that she wouldn't return,[86] there were reports suggesting that Keira Knightley would reprise her role as Elizabeth Swann due to the return of Will and the focus on their grown-up son Henry in the film.[87][88][89] Once the film was shown to test audiences, the filmmakers felt they were "demanded" to reunite both Will and Elizabeth's character.[37] To ensure that Knightley could reprise this role, the production moved for a one-day shoot in London, where she was working.[58]

Other actors had expressed interest in reprising their roles from the previous films, such as Tia Dalma portrayer Naomie Harris.[90] Both Lee Arenberg and Mackenzie Crook commented on the possibility of returning as Pintel and Ragetti.[91] In an interview on November 7, 2014, Crook confirmed that he had received a call of availability from Disney for the film,[92] though he later declined in order to focus on his television series Detectorists.[93] He said he had felt "pangs of nostalgia" when the cast and crew filmed without him.[94] Arenberg, who also had a television commitment, to Once Upon a Time, added that he felt like the producers "weren't really trying to court us like they really wanted us."[95]

Filming

Depp on set in Queensland in June 2015
Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg originally stated that shooting would take place in Puerto Rico and New Orleans,[96] and Bruckheimer had previously mentioned that there might be a sequence in Louisiana.[97] However, a spokesman for Australian Arts Minister George Brandis confirmed that the fifth installment was set to shoot exclusively in Australia after the government agreed to repurpose $20 million of tax incentives, originally intended for the remake of 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea; thus edging out Mexico and South Africa as filming locations.[98] Filming took place exclusively in Queensland, Australia, as the largest production to ever shoot in the country. Village Roadshow Studios and the Whitsunday Islands were officially confirmed as filming locations.[99] On January 1, 2015, The Rainbow Gypsy, a 35-year-old replica of an 1897 Scottish trawler, underwent an extensive refit at the Gold Coast, including a new bowsprit, and reconfigured decks and cabins, for filming as the Dying Gull. Its captain and owner, Kit Woodward, was a rigger in the film.[100]

Filming commenced on February 17, 2015.[1] Ship scenes were filmed in front of a giant outdoor greenscreen in Helensvale,[101] while a film set in the form of a village was built in Maudsland.[102] Because the greenscreens' height blocked the sunlight, containers with inflatable bluescreens mounted on top were added to the set to allow some light to enter.[103] While the first script that Paul Cameron read for the film involved "five to six main ships" until a rewrite more than doubled the fleet, and Bruckheimer promised 13 ships facing off in "the biggest battles yet,"[7] the end product had eleven vessels; to cut costs, most of these were partial constructs later enhanced by computer graphics, with some built atop a hydraulic rig to mimic the movement of seafaring while on land. The camera crew, led by the director of photography Paul Cameron, also made extensive use of drones, to capture immersive views at sea without resorting to helicopters or cranes.[17][104]

Filming moved to Doug Jennings Park on the Spit from March 30 to June 15 for water-bound scenes.[105] However, due to extreme sea sickness among the cast and crew from the "big swells," filming moved to Raby Bay for calmer waters.[106] Scenes were shot at Byron Bay on June 1. Locals made up more than 75 percent of the 850-plus crew then working on the film.[107] After much speculation about whether Orlando Bloom would return, Bloom arrived at the Gold Coast in late May to reprise his role as Will Turner.[33][34] Scenes featuring a skeleton of a sperm whale that had been constructed were shot at Hastings Point from June 21 to 23.[108]


Several problems occurred during production in regards to the usage of capuchin monkeys for the film, including violating Australian biosecurity laws, the safety of the monkeys and of the crew.
A number of issues and controversies set back the film during its production. The biosecurity laws in Australia posed problems regarding the capuchin monkeys that portray Hector Barbossa's pet monkey Jack, because the animals are regarded as a category 1 pest and call for strict requirements and a 30-day quarantine.[109] Further controversy erupted from animal rights activist groups, who urged Federal Environment Minister Greg Hunt to reject the entry application, arguing that the long air-flight would affect their health, and that their performance was unnatural and would create demand for illegal wildlife trade.[110] The three activist groups were Humane Society International Australia, WildFutures, and the Captive Animals Protection Society (Freedom for Animals/FFA).[111] One of the monkeys caused further disruption when it wandered off set at Movie World, and bit the ear of a make-up artist on another production set for Mako Mermaids.[112]

Crew and cast members were forced to cover the camera lenses on all mobile phones with duct tape to prevent leaks before its release. To prevent fans from interfering with the production, secret filming locations used the production name of "Herschel" to hide the fact it was the fifth Pirates of the Caribbean film.[113] Following the attempt of an armed man trying to bypass security, the already tight security was increased.[114]

On March 10, 2015, Depp was injured off set and had to be flown to the United States for surgery.[115] Due to his absence, filming stalled completely and 200 crew members were forced to stand down for two weeks, after finishing all they could do without Depp.[116] Depp returned to set on April 21.[117] In June, Kaya Scodelario was injured on set along with a stuntman.[118] In early July, dismantling of the sets at the Spit had begun.[119] Most of the cast and crew had finished on July 8, and a wrap party was held on July 11.[120] Filming then moved to the Whitsundays for the final shots.[119][121] On July 21, 2015, Rønning announced that filming had wrapped after a 95-day shoot.[122] After nearly a year in post-production, reshoots and additional photography were conducted in Vancouver, Canada from March 24 to April 13, 2016, under the production title "Herschel Additional Photography".[123]

Post-production
Editing was a collaboration between Roger Barton and Leigh Folsom Boyd, with the latter detailing that "Roger started from the beginning of the film and I started from the end, and we kind of met in the middle." Boyd added that it was the longest post-production process she was ever involved with, as Disney wanted to give "the support and leeway we needed to tell the story and allow for the complex visual effects to bake."[124] The editors worked closely with the previsualization team to, according to effects supervisor Gary Brozenich, "give meat to the bones of the plates that needed effects explanation as well as any new CG beats that would be added later." Along with the post-production team in Los Angeles, Brozenich had to split his time going to the UK and Montreal, to check on the eight companies handling the film's 2,000 visual effects shots, with 150 of them consisting only of computer graphics. The primary vendor was Brozenich's own employer Moving Picture Company (MPC).[103][125] Among MPC's work were Salazar's undead pirates, whose on-set footage was mostly replaced by CGI to achieve missing body parts and floating hair and clothing. Brozenich stated that what was kept of the original actors was "their run, gait and faces." To provide reference for the floating parts, which were meant to resemble a perpetual drowning state, a stuntman in full costume and wig was filmed underwater in a swimming pool performing various actions.[17]

Atomic Fiction handled the scenes at St. Martin, turning the few blocks of buildings built on set into more than 600 CG buildings, surrounded by a jungle environment. The work combined references from both the Caribbean and Thailand, and enhanced through CGI both the guillotine on which Jack Sparrow is nearly executed and the bank from the heist scene; the bank was meant to look as if its foundations were dug through the ground instead of sliding on the surface.[126] Along with sea footage filmed in both the Australian sets and Key West, Florida, there was extensive usage of water simulations, with the artists using the Beaufort scale to ensure the waves and wind realistically matched.[103]

Music
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (soundtrack)
This was the first film in the series (since the first) that Hans Zimmer did not compose the music for. Instead, the main composer is one of his protégés, Geoff Zanelli, who had worked on the previous four installments in the franchise.[127] Zanelli said that Zimmer "redefined the sound of the entire genre" and considered it a great accomplishment to have worked with him and Bruckheimer. He used this experience with the franchise to build a new sound for the film.[127] He stated that "you don't have to modernize the melodies, those are timeless," citing one example of how he tried to make the sound more modern by featuring an electric cello to create a menacing leitmotif for Captain Armando Salazar.[128] This was also the first Pirates of the Caribbean score to feature mostly live percussion, as opposed to the programmed percussion in the prior scores. As it took more than a year for the film to start production following Zanelli being hired, he accompanied the script's evolution, and was familiar with the character arcs that he would need to translate in their theme songs. Zanelli always started writing the music on the piano, namely a synthesized orchestra.[129] The film's soundtrack was released on May 26, 2017.[130]

Marketing
A robust marketing effort helped promote Dead Men Tell No Tales.[131] The film was first showcased at the Disney D23 Expo 2015, where Depp appeared in costume as Jack Sparrow and the film's logo was revealed, with Orlando Bloom confirmed to be starring in the film.[132][133] A 240 page tie-in prequel novel expanding the backstory of the character Carina Smyth was also released, titled Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales – The Brightest Star in the North: The Adventures of Carina Smyth.[134] The film was showcased at the 2016 Walt Disney Content Showcase in South Africa, where concept art, story details and on-set images were previewed.[135] On April 26, 2017, Depp made a cameo appearance at Disneyland's Pirates of the Caribbean ride in an event to promote the film, surprising unsuspecting guests by portraying Jack Sparrow in place of one of the animatronics.[136]

Release
Theatrical
Dead Men Tell No Tales screened on March 28, 2017 at the 2017 CinemaCon event in Las Vegas.[137] It had its world premiere at the Shanghai Disney Resort in Shanghai on May 11, 2017,[138] and was released in the United States on May 26.[139] In some countries, including the United Kingdom, the film was released as Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge,[140] a decision that the directors were not informed about.[58] It is the first Hollywood feature to be released in the United States for the new panorama-like ScreenX format, which played in two locations in the United States, the CGV Buena Park and the CGV Cinemas in Los Angeles. Additionally, it played in 81 screens at select theaters in Korea, China, Thailand, Vietnam, Turkey, and Indonesia. The film also played in 4D on 373 4DX screens worldwide.[141] The film was released in IMAX in an expanded 1.9:1 aspect ratio.[142]

Home media
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales was released on digital download by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on September 19, 2017, and on Blu-ray, Ultra HD Blu-ray, and DVD on October 3.[143] It was the top home-media release in its first week, with the Blu-ray version accounting for 78% of sales, and brought the previous four films back into the 25 best-sold Blu-rays.[144]

Terry Rossio's screenplay
Following the film's theatrical release in 2017, Terry Rossio released his unproduced screenplay on his website Wordplay. Also titled Dead Men Tell No Tales, this was a proposed story written with the studio and producer guideline that Keira Knightley and Orlando Bloom would not return to the series, and so those characters would not be available. Rossio's draft also included additional information in extensive footnotes. Among other characters, Pintel and Ragetti return from the trilogy, Philip Swift and Syrena from On Stranger Tides, with Dead Men Tell No Tales also introducing a female villain, a sea witch named the Sea Widow. The story featured the Trident of Neptune, which contains the three Pearls of Neptune that each have a different power: Rhysis, which commands the winds; Tyrah, pearl of the tides; and Miro, which commands the creatures of the sea. It would also be revealed that Rhysis was hidden twice over inside a sapphire in the hilt of the Sword of Triton, only identified as Blackbeard's or Barbossa's sword in Rossio's script, with the power being revealed to control the wind, as well as a ship's rigging, and would not be used to release the Black Pearl from the bottle.[8]

Rossio's script was discarded in 2012, and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain, the Sea Widow, which made Johnny Depp "worried that would be redundant to Dark Shadows, which also featured a female villain."[47] As a result, in January 2013, Disney hired Jeff Nathanson to work on a script in the development of the film, which featured the Trident of Poseidon, an artifact that holds all the power of the sea,[1] mainly used in the final version of the story to break every curse and by Will Turner's son Henry to free his father from the Flying Dutchman.[13]

Reception
Box office
With an estimated production budget of $230–320 million,[3] Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales grossed $172.6 million in the United States and Canada, and $623.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $795.9 million.[6] It had a worldwide opening of $271.4 million from 55 markets, with $24 million coming from 1,088 IMAX screens.[145] The film's six-day opening gross pushed the franchise gross past the $4 billion mark.[146] Despite being the lowest-grossing film of the series in North America by nearly $70 million and despite scoring the second-lowest nominal gross of the franchise outside North America (only ahead of Curse of the Black Pearl), Dead Men Tell No Tales became the highest-grossing entry of the Pirates franchise outside North America when accounting for foreign-exchange rates, surpassing On Stranger Tides, which grossed $593.4 million at July 2017 rates.[147] The largest-earning foreign markets were China ($172.3 million), Japan ($59.5 million), and Russia and the CIS ($40.7 million), where it was the second-highest-grossing film behind Avatar (2009).[148] Deadline Hollywood noted the film would turn a net profit of around $280 million after factoring together all expenses and revenues based on a projected $850 million final gross (though it would ultimately fall short of that figure, likely resulting in a smaller profit).[149]

United States and Canada
Dead Men Tell No Tales debuted over the four-day Memorial Day opening weekend, being released in 4,276 theaters, of which over 3,100 were 3D, taking advantage of formats such as IMAX, D-Box, and 4DX.[150] The film earned $23.4 million on its first day, including $5.5 million from previews. It was the lowest opening day of the franchise.[151] Dead Men Tell No Tales grossed $63 million over three days, and $78.5 million over four (Friday–Monday), finishing first at the box office, ahead of Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 (2017) and fellow newcomer Baywatch (2017).[152][153] It was the second-smallest opening weekend of the franchise, only earning more than the first film, with each of the other installments earning at least $90 million.[154] Despite the film registering the highest test score in the series,[155] the opening came in well below expectations of $80–115 million.[156][157] Analysts attributed the underperformance to negative reviews, franchise fatigue, and Johnny Depp's diminishing returns and depreciating public image, amid his personal problems. Still, it performed better than Disney's previous Memorial Day releases (Prince of Persia: The Sands of Time (2010), Tomorrowland (2015), and Alice Through the Looking Glass (2016)),[158][159][160] and studio executives said they were pleased with the movie's opening,[146] which helped Disney push past $1 billion in the US.[161]

The film fell by a total of 65% in its second weekend, the worst of the series, grossing $22.1 million,[162] and finishing in third place, after newcomers Wonder Woman (2017) ($103.3 million) and Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie (2017) ($23.9 million).[163] It remained in the top ten for four more weeks.[164][165]

Other territories
Marketed as Salazar's Revenge in most countries, the film was released day-and-date with its debut in 54 markets (91% of its total marketplace, except Japan, where it debuted on July 1).[166] Preliminary reports had the film opening to $150–175 million, but possibly overperforming depending on major markets, most notably China.[150][167] While its Chinese run benefited from the May 28–30 Dragon Boat Festival—a lucrative moviegoing period—and from International Children's Day (June 1),[168][169] the Manchester Arena bombing had a deteriorating effect on certain European markets over the film's opening weekend.[170] From Wednesday to Friday, it registered an opening of $208.8 million. Around $14 million of that came from IMAX screenings, the second-biggest international IMAX opening in May, after Captain America: Civil War (2016).[145] Similar to its US plunge, it earned $73.8 million in its second weekend, falling to second place, behind Wonder Woman.[171]

It recorded the biggest opening day of the year in several markets, including Germany ($3.6 million), Austria, France ($2.3 million), Finland, Sweden, Belgium, Thailand ($400,000), Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Netherlands ($900,000).[170][172] Russia posted the biggest opening of all time with $18.4 million ($18.6 million including previews).[145][161][173] In China, where the film had its global premiere, it earned $21.3 million on its opening day, the fourth-biggest Disney opening in the country. It had an 87% marketshare and had already surpassed the entire earnings of Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End.[174] Earning a total of $67.9 million, it registered the third-highest three-day for any Disney title, and a much-higher opening than the US.[145] The film did extremely well in IMAX, earning $9 million from 401 screens from Friday to early Monday bookings. The robust opening has been attributed to the Dragon Boat Festival, Depp's star power, the ubiquity of the franchise, the impact of Shanghai Disneyland Park, and good word of mouth, with a score of 7.5/10 on reviews aggregator Douban and 8.7/10 on top mobile-ticketing platform Weying.[175][176] The film's final release market was Japan (July 1), where it opened at number one, achieving the highest-grossing opening for a Western film of the year, earning $9.25 million over the July 1–2 weekend.[177] It retained the box office lead for one more week, and was the highest-grossing foreign film in the following weekend.[178]

Critical response
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 30% of 291 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 4.7/10. The website's consensus reads: "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales proves that neither a change in directors nor an undead Javier Bardem is enough to drain this sinking franchise's murky bilge."[179] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 39 out of 100, based on 45 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable" reviews.[180] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale,[154] and PostTrak reported 81% of those gave the film a positive score.[181]

Mike Ryan of Uproxx criticized what he termed as a convoluted plot and overabundance of characters, resulting in a film that was "practically incoherent."[182] Writing for Rolling Stone, Peter Travers called the film "bloated, boring, repetitive, and draining" and gave it one star out of four.[183] Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote that the film echoes the first three of the franchise, "in which Johnny Depp's louche and campy Jack Sparrow played second banana to an insipid love story... the two romantic leads ... succeed only in making the shortest movie in the series seem just as long as the rest."[184] A. O. Scott of The New York Times said of the film, "Its pleasures are so meager, its delight in its own inventions so forced and false, that it becomes almost the perfect opposite of entertainment."[185] Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post remarked that the film was "loud, overstimulating and hard to take in all in one sitting."[186] Mick LaSalle of San Francisco Chronicle found the film to be "a jumble of half-baked impulses" that had been forced into a played-out franchise.[187]

Richard Roeper of Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four, saying: "Dead Men works well enough as a stand-alone, swashbuckling comedic spectacle, thanks to the terrific performances, some ingenious practical effects, impressive CGI and a steady diet of PG-13 dialogue peppered with not particularly sophisticated but (I have to admit) fairly funny sexual innuendo."[188] Pete Hammond of Deadline Hollywood praised the film, calling it "the most entertaining installment," and giving credit to Rønning and Sandberg for creating a "rollicking good time". He praised the visual effects, particularly Salazar and his crew, arguing that the film should be in line to receive an Academy Award for Visual Effects. He also gave high praise to Bardem for being able to create such a "fully dimensional villain" under the layers of make-up and CGI, and Depp for keeping the film and franchise going.[189] Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a 'B', praising the fun nature of the film and its visuals and calling it "gorgeously detailed swashbuckling nonsense," but wished that the script had taken more risks instead of following the formula used in previous films.[190] Ashley Esqueda of CNET gave the film a positive review, arguing that it brought the franchise back to what made its first two installments so fun, and praised Depp's performance as being "delightful as ever."[191] Brian Truitt of USA Today gave the film three stars out of four, saying "What was once a past-its-prime franchise seems to have found new life."[192]

Accolades
At the 38th Golden Raspberry Awards, Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales received nominations for Worst Actor for Johnny Depp, Worst Supporting Actor for Javier Bardem, and Worst Screen Combo for Depp and "his worn out drunk routine".[193] Gary Brozenich, Sheldon Stopsack, Patrick Ledda, Richard Clegg, and Richard Little of MPC was nominated for Outstanding Visual Effects – Feature Film at the 2017 Hollywood Post Alliance Awards.[194] The film was nominated for Choice Movie: Action, Choice Movie Actor: Action, Choice Movie Actress: Action, Choice Movie: Villain, Choice Movie: Summer, and Choice Liplock at the 2017 Teen Choice Awards.[195]

Future
On March 4, 2017, directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg stated that Dead Men Tell No Tales was "only the beginning of the final adventure", indicating that it would not be the last film of the franchise and that a sixth film could be released.[196] While the post-credits scene teased a potential plot involving Davy Jones, who appears in some form while Will and Elizabeth sleep,[9] the directors also hinted that it could be the "beginning of the end" or "just a dream or nightmare".[10] In September 2017, producer Jerry Bruckheimer indicated that another Pirates sequel would be possible if Dead Men Tell No Tales did well in its home release.[197] In October 2017, the sixth film was confirmed and Kaya Scodelario said that she was contracted to return.[198] Shortly after, it was reported that Rønning was being eyed to return to direct the sequel.[199] By August 2018, the sixth film was still in development.[200] The following month, Keira Knightley said that she did not see herself returning for another installment due to the fact that she is a mother now and that the films take too long to shoot.[201]

In October 2018, it was reported that Disney had been looking for ways to reboot the franchise, bringing on Deadpool (2016) writers Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick though producer Jerry Bruckheimer was expected to return.[202] However, in February 2019, Reese and Wernick departed the project and the reboot was cancelled.[203] In October 2019, Disney announced that Craig Mazin and Ted Elliott would write the script for the sixth film.[204][205] In May 2020, Bruckheimer commented that the first draft of the screenplay for the sixth film would soon be finished, although he was not sure if Depp should reprise his role in the film.[206] However, in April 2022, in the midst of the trial between Johnny Depp and Amber Heard, Depp revealed that he had no intention of returning to the franchise, citing his strained relationship with Disney after they had removed him from the franchise before a verdict was reached in the case.[207]

In February 2023, Orlando Bloom expressed interest in returning to the franchise as Will Turner in the sixth film.[208][209][210] The next month, Knightley explained to Entertainment Tonight why she wouldn't make a return to the franchise. "What about Elizabeth Swann?" Knightley joked when asked if she would rejoin the crew. "I mean, she sailed away so nicely. She sailed away in brilliant style, but if she could be able to then yea she might return for the final adventure. "[211] Bruckheimer has meanwhile reiterated he would like to have Depp involved in the sequel.[212][213] In July 2023, it was reported that Depp had softened his stance and was willing to return to the franchise, "If it's the right project".[214] The next month, Mazin stated that he'd pitched a Pirates script to Disney, but that he would only commit to it if he was able to work with Elliot; Mazin confirmed that his and Elliot's script was bought by Disney, also commenting that it was "too weird", but the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike had slowed production of the sixth installment.[215]

In March 2024, Jerry Bruckheimer stated that the sixth film would be a reboot.[216] Despite this, two months later, Bruckheimer hoped to see Johnny Depp return.[217]

On May 20, 2024, Bruckheimer provided further clarification on the series's status. In an interview with Entertainment Weekly, he confirmed that there were two different Pirates movies in production. The first is a reboot that he intends to produce with scriptwriter Jeff Nathanson, and the second is the Margot Robbie film that will be penned by Christina Hodson. He stated that he hoped both films would be made, and noted that Disney was particularly receptive to the Robbie-led film. In regards to the reboot, he confirmed that it would not follow characters from the previous films, but stated that he hoped Depp would make an appearance.[218]

Notes
 As depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)
 According to producer Jerry Bruckheimer, Jack Sparrow was 18.[7]
 The ship was shrunk by Blackbeard "five winters" earlier, according to Barbossa, and before the events of Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011). In addition, according to the footnotes of Terry Rossio's unproduced screenplay,[8] Barbossa does not know about the Black Pearl in a bottle in the fourth film, though Barbossa later shows knowledge in the fifth film through unconfirmed means.
 While the post-credits scene teased a potential plot involving Davy Jones, who appears in some form while Will and Elizabeth sleep,[9] directors Joachim Ronning and Espen Sandberg also hinted that it could be the "beginning of the end" or "just a dream or nightmare".[10]
References
 Vejvoda, Jim (February 17, 2015). "Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Begins Production". IGN. Archived from the original on February 18, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge". British Board of Film Classification.
 Holmes, Adam (December 9, 2020). "The Wild Way Johnny Depp Cost Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Millions Of Dollars". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on April 3, 2021. Retrieved April 3, 2021.
 "2017 Feature Film Study" (PDF). FilmL.A. Feature Film Study: 22. August 2018.
 Harris, Amy; Scarr, Lanai. "Depp drama is turning 'Pirates' into $320m dog". dailytelegraph.com.au. Retrieved June 20, 2024.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Retrieved July 6, 2023.
 Empire. February 2017, p.95.
 "Wordplayer.com: PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES by Terry Rossio". www.wordplayer.com.
 Leadbeater, Alex (May 26, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 Post-Credits Scene Explained". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Alexander, Bryan. "'Pirates of the Caribbean': About that death and post-credits scene". USA TODAY.
 Burgess, Matthew (August 23, 2012). "Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow Pirates of the Caribbean 5". The Age. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
 Singer, Michael (2017). Disney Pirates: The Definitive Collector's Anthology. Disney Editions. ISBN 9781484747001.
 A Pirate's Life for Them—Meet the Characters of Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales - D23
 "You Don't Know Jack". Total Film (258): 11–12. June 2017. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2018.
 Snetiker, Marc (April 26, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Revisits Its Dual Disney Legacies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017.
 "This Dude Who Plays A Young Jack Sparrow Looks Alarmingly Like Johnny Depp". Refinery29.com/. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2021.
 Hogg, Trevor (June 16, 2017). "Setting Sail with Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". 3D Total. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2020.
 Empire. June 2017, Issue 336, p.104.
 Empire. June 2017, Issue 336, p.103.
 The Matador & The Bull: Secrets of Salazar & the Silent Mary (Featurette). Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2017.
 "Javier Bardem dishes on Pirates of the Caribbean make-up". Archived from the original on May 21, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales | On-set visit with Geoffrey Rush 'Hector Barbossa'". YouTube. May 28, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 (2017) Geoffrey Rush talks about his experience making the movie". YouTube. June 7, 2017.
 Fuller, Becky (March 28, 2017). "Pirates 5: Will Turner's Son Confirmed". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2017.
 "John Lewis Christmas ad Scot to star in Pirates of the Caribbean". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017.
 Plumb, Ali (September 10, 2015). "Kaya Scodelario on Pirates of the Caribbean 5: 'It'll be much more like the first film'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015.
 Fullerton, Huw. "Pirates of the Caribbean 5: Who is Kaya Scodelario playing?". Radio Times. Archived from the original on September 30, 2015.
 Han, Angie (August 15, 2015). "Orlando Bloom Officially Confirmed for 'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' [D23 Expo 2015]". /Film. Archived from the original on October 23, 2015. Retrieved August 25, 2015.
 "The cast and crew of the Pirates of the Caribbean blockbuster are making their presence known on social media". Gold Coast Bulletin. February 18, 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved February 23, 2015.
 Kroll, Justin (February 4, 2015). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Adds Three to Cast". Variety. Archived from the original on February 7, 2015. Retrieved February 4, 2015.
 Multiple sources:
Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 24, 2016). "Paul McCartney Joins Johnny Depp & Crew For 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved December 28, 2020.
McCahill, Mike (May 22, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales review – Cap'n Jack's panto's back". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved December 28, 2020.
Alexander, Bryan (May 31, 2017). "Paul McCartney went too pirate for 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved January 23, 2018.
 "Jacob Elordi Replies to Fans on the Internet" (YouTube video). GQ. July 30, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2025. I was in the background of the movie. I wasn't in the movie, I wasn't credited, I wasn't billed, I didn't audition, I was an extra.
 "Forget Johnny, Orlando Bloom the Hollywood heavyweight in Coast's Pirates spotlight". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean star Orlando Bloom spotted out and about on the Gold Coast". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on June 2, 2015.
 Kamali, Luke (December 16, 2014). "Orlando Bloom Says Pirates of the Caribbean 5 May Be a Soft Reboot". IGN. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved December 17, 2014.
 "Keira Knightley confirmed for Pirates of the Caribbean 5". April 19, 2017. Archived from the original on April 19, 2017.
 Alexander, Bryan (May 26, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' uprising: How the fans demanded Keira Knightley". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021.
 Nugent, John (August 22, 2017). "Exclusive: Bill Nighy had no idea he was in Pirates of the Caribbean 5". Empire. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2018.
 McWeeny, Drew (December 4, 2010). "Disney will set sail for 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 5 & 6 back-to-back". HitFix.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 14, 2011). "Disney Sets Terry Rossio To Script Fifth 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Installment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Is Being Rewritten; Rob Marshall May Direct". Screen Rant. January 11, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016.
 "Disney Sets Rob Marshall To Direct Adaptation Of 'Into The Woods'". Deadline Hollywood. January 11, 2012. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved December 21, 2020.
 "Sam Raimi, Shawn Levy And Others Being Considered For Pirates 5 Directing Job". CinemaBlend. June 1, 2011. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013.
 Rottenberg, Josh (February 16, 2017). "Gore Verbinski opens up about his Hollywood hiatus, finding 'A Cure for Wellness' and sock puppets". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 4, 2018. Retrieved February 10, 2018.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 9, 2013). "Disney Getting Close On 'Pirates 5' Director; Here's The Short List". Archived from the original on October 9, 2016.
 Masters, Kim (October 9, 2013). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Delayed Beyond Summer 2015". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 19, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Rossio, Terry (August 7, 2016). "Wordplay/Columns/55. "Time Risk" by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 McClintock, Pamela (January 14, 2013). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Will Hit Theaters July 2015; 'Maleficent' Moves to Summer 2014". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 18, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 Sullivan, Kevin (August 22, 2013). "'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5' Directors Tease 'Dead Men' Sequel". MTV. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 13, 2013). "'Kon-Tiki' Helmers Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg Land 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved October 5, 2014.
 Klompus, Jack (August 22, 2013). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' title revealed". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 "Exclusive: And The Title Of Pirates Of The Caribbean 5 Will Be..." This Is Infamous. August 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 24, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2025. When I asked if this would be a stand-alone adventure or tie into the overall mythology of the series, I was told both, so who knows what's on deck...
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 19, 2014). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Has Not Been Greenlit Yet". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 O'Connell, Sean (April 23, 2014). "Frozen 2, Pirates Of The Caribbean 5 Aren't Happening Any Time Soon". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Nepales, Ruben (April 13, 2014). "Depp has high hopes for 'Pirates 5'". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 Lang, Brent (July 23, 2014). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' to Hit Theaters July 2017". Variety. Archived from the original on July 25, 2014. Retrieved July 13, 2014.
 Empire. June 2017. Issue 336, p.104.
 Nugent, John (June 1, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean 5: Ten Revelations From Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". Empire. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
 "YouTube". Archived from the original on May 21, 2017 – via YouTube.
 Total Film. June 2017. Issue 258.
 Plumb, Ali (September 10, 2015). "Kaya Scodelario on Pirates of the Caribbean 5: 'It'll be much more like the first film'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 14, 2015.
 Caranicas, Peter (July 28, 2015). "Below the Line Agencies Place Clients in Films and TV Shows – Variety". Variety. Archived from the original on July 28, 2015.
 "Johnny Depp pledges future to 'Pirates Of The Caribbean' & Film & TV News". NME. May 16, 2011. Archived from the original on November 27, 2011. Retrieved September 20, 2011.
 "Penelope Cruz Talks Twice Born, The Counselor, I'm so excited and Pirates of The Caribbean 5". Collider. September 26, 2012. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016.
 Stadler, Nancy (May 20, 2011). "Geoffrey Rush isn't rushing to exit Disney's "Pirates of the Caribbean" film franchise". JimHillMedia.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2014. Retrieved August 17, 2014.
 Forget about being a man of the cloth. "On Stranger Tides" Sam Claflin wants to be a man of action in "Pirates 5" - Archived
 The mysterious tail ... er ... tale of "On Stranger Tides" mermaid, Astrid Bergès-Frisbey - Archived
 Hill, Jim (October 16, 2011). "Greg Ellis wonders if his 'Pirates of the Caribbean' character will be returning for the fifth film in this series". Archived from the original on August 5, 2016.
 "Keith Richards to star in Pirates 5". October 19, 2012. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Casts Its New Villain?". Screen Crush. December 2, 2013. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016.
 Vejvoda, Jim (October 14, 2014). "Javier Bardem May Play Villain in Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". IGN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved January 23, 2015.
 "Javier Bardem on Why He Wanted to Join 'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales'". Collider. May 30, 2017. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017.
 Ge, Linda; Sneider, Jeff (November 21, 2014). "Brenton Thwaites in Talks to Join 'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' (Exclusive)". TheWrap. Archived from the original on November 23, 2014. Retrieved November 22, 2013.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 31, 2014). "Oh, Henry! Disney Chasing Hearththrobs For Next 'Pirates Of The Caribbean'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2014.
 Graser, Marc (January 24, 2015). "Kaya Scodelario Boards Disney's 'Pirates of the Caribbean 5'". Variety. Archived from the original on January 27, 2015. Retrieved January 25, 2015.
 "'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5' Rumors, Latest News and Updates: Orlando Bloom Leads Reboot?". Parent Herald. July 19, 2016. Archived from the original on September 24, 2016.
 "Christoph Waltz and Rebecca Hall Circling 'Pirates of the Caribbean 5'". Screen Rant. November 28, 2013. Archived from the original on June 24, 2015.
 Simonot, Suzanne (February 12, 2015). "Speculation Pirates of the Caribbean cast shooting two films at once on Gold Coast". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on May 12, 2015. Retrieved February 12, 2015.
 "Orlando Bloom Says He's All Done With 'Pirates,' 'Lord Of The Rings'". MTV. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023.
 "Orlando Bloom 'turns down Pirates 4'". Digital Spy. July 27, 2009.
 "Three Pirates enough for Keira". Irish Independent. March 22, 2010.
 "Even Johnny Depp couldn't convince Keira Knightley to do another "Pirates of the Caribbean"". Uproxx.com. September 12, 2011. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017.
 Ingham, James (October 9, 2011). "Orlando Bloom would love to go back to Pirates of the Carribean [sic]". Daily Star.
 Moviehole.Net – Movie, TV & Entertainment News | Film, DVD & Blu-Ray Reviews | Celeb Interviews | Movie Trailers | Freebies | Pirates 5 not happening yet, but when it does will it be in full Bloom!? - Archived
 Rich, Katey (August 15, 2015). "Orlando Bloom Will Return for the Fifth Pirates of the Caribbean Movie". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on August 18, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2014.
 "Keira Knightley will never go back to Pirates of the Caribbean despite saying she 'loved it'". Daily Mirror. July 2, 2014.
 "So, Keira Knightley MIGHT return to the "Pirates of the Caribbean" movies and that'd be awesome". December 18, 2016.
 Smith, Erika (December 18, 2016). "So, Keira Knightley MIGHT return to the "Pirates of the Caribbean" movies and that'd be awesome". HelloGiggles. Retrieved October 1, 2023.
 "Keira Knightley to Return to 'Pirates of the Caribbean' (Exclusive Details)".
 Yamato, Jen (May 11, 2011). "Naomie Harris on the Incredible True Story Behind Her New Film (and Her Possible Pirates Return)". Archived from the original on February 23, 2017.
 "Breaking: Lee Arenberg Interview". Outright Geekery. October 25, 2014. Archived from the original on November 11, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014.
 Mellor, Louise (November 7, 2014). "Mackenzie Crook interview: Game Of Thrones, The Detectorists, Pirates 5". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on November 9, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014.
 "Mackenzie Crook turned down Pirates of the Caribbean to focus on Detectorists". The Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved October 20, 2015.
 "Mackenzie Crook's Pirates nostalgia". The List. December 20, 2015. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017.
 Skinner, Keven (November 15, 2015). "Lee Arenberg Talks About Grumpy in Once Upon a Time Season 5, Pirates of The Caribbean & More [Interview]". Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 13, 2016.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (January 15, 2014). "Joachim Rønning, Espen Sandberg Contract 'Amnesia' As Possible Post-'Pirates' Project". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 19, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2014.
 Taylor, Drew (June 23, 2013). "Jerry Bruckheimer Talks Status of 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'". Indiewire.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Child, Ben (September 1, 2014). "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 gets green light to shoot in Australia". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014.
 Bochenski, Natalie (October 2, 2014). "Pirates of the Caribbean movie confirmed to film in Queensland". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on October 2, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2014.
 Crane, Kristoffer (January 2, 2015). "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 has strict requirements for swashbuckling extras". The Courier-Mail. Archived from the original on January 2, 2015. Retrieved January 23, 2015.
 Laughlin, Shaya (January 13, 2015). "Helensvale set chosen to film ship scenes for Pirates of the Caribbean blockbuster". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on November 23, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2015.
 Bedo, Stephanie (December 11, 2014). "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 filming location no longer a secret as nosy Maudsland locals take a peak at Hollywood at work". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2014.
 Robertson, Barbara (June 2017). "VFX: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Post Magazine. Archived from the original on September 19, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
 Long, Kelle (May 25, 2017). "Dead Men Tell No Tales DP on how They Made the Splashiest Pirates Film of All Time". Where to Watch. Archived from the original on September 23, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
 Houghton, Jack; Suzanne, Simonot; Robyn, Wuth (March 24, 2015). "Pirates of the Caribbean to shoot at Doug Jennings Park on The Spit as Broadwater becomes Hollywood backdrop". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on October 30, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 "Johnny Depp and Pirates of Caribbean in search of calmer waters in Raby Bay after seasickness hits". ABC News. May 6, 2015. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015.
 Simonot, Suzanne (February 19, 2015). "Disney confirms Depp set to battle deadly ghost pirates in Dead Men's plot on Gold Coast". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2015.
 Chambers, Geoff (June 21, 2015). "Pirates of the Caribbean invade NSW camping town of Hastings Point". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2015.
 Ironside, Robyn (February 17, 2015). "Pirates of the Caribbean 'pests' to be quarantined for a month on Gold Coast". News.com.au. Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved February 17, 2015.
 Milman, Oliver (February 19, 2015). "Anger at bid to fly monkeys to Australia for Pirates of the Caribbean film". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on March 12, 2015. Retrieved February 19, 2015.
 Milman, Oliver (February 18, 2015). "Anger at bid to fly monkeys to Australia for Pirates of the Caribbean film". The Guardian. Retrieved March 12, 2023.
 Robertson, Joshua (June 30, 2015). "Monkey bites woman on ear in sneak attack near Pirates of the Caribbean set". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on February 8, 2017.
 Stolz, Greg (March 15, 2015). "Mobile phones with 'eye patches' amid extreme security measures on set of Pirates of the Caribbean". The Courier-Mail. Archived from the original on March 15, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015.
 "Girlfriend of 'pirate' tells of romance as he is charged for film set stunt". 9news.com.au. March 11, 2015. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. Retrieved March 15, 2015.
 Kroll, Justin (March 10, 2015). "Johnny Depp Injured on Location for 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved March 11, 2015.
 "Johnny Depp hand injury delays Pirates of the Caribbean filming". BBC News. March 31, 2015. Archived from the original on May 22, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Bochenski, Natalie (April 21, 2015). "Captain Jack's back: Johnny Depp to resume filming Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on May 16, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2015.
 Halliwell, Elle (June 15, 2015). "Injured star's curse of the Caribbean". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2020.
 "Pirates abandon ships as Johnny Depp and crew prepare to set sail for final scenes in Whitsundays". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on July 14, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales wraps but local crew says it's been top for Gold Coast". Gold Coast Bulletin. Southport, Queensland, Australia. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2015.
 "Captain Jack Sparrow to visit the Whitsundays next week". Whitsunday Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' wraps up filming - Ecumenical News.com". Ecumenical News.com. August 12, 2015. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved November 22, 2020.
 "Hollywood North: Pirates of the Caribbean coming ashore in Vancouver". Archived from the original on October 10, 2016.
 Hullfish, Steve (June 2, 2017). "Art of the Cut – Pirates edition". ProVideo Coalition. Archived from the original on October 7, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2018.
 Frei, Vincent (July 13, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean – Dead Men Tell No Tales: Gary Brozenich – Production VFX Supervisor – MPC". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on March 19, 2018. Retrieved March 2, 2018.
 Frei, Vincent (August 15, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean – Dead Men Tell No Tales: Rudy Grossman – Digital Effects Supervisor – Atomic Fiction". Art of VFX. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
 Barker, Andrew (August 16, 2016). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Taps Composer Geoff Zanelli". Variety. Archived from the original on June 10, 2017.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5': Behind-the-Scenes of a Scoring Session With Geoff Zanelli". Variety. May 21, 2017. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017.
 "Interview: Pirates of the Caribbean 5 Composer Geoff Zanelli". Comingsoon.net. May 23, 2017. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales Original Motion Picture Soundtrack Sets Sail 5/26". Broadway World. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 Barnes, Brooks (May 28, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Sequel Tops Box Office as 'Baywatch' Flops". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 White, James. "Orlando Bloom Confirmed For Pirates Of The Caribbean 5". Empire. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015.
 Sliva, Marty (August 15, 2015). "D23 2015: Orlando Bloom Confirmed for Pirates of the Caribbean 5". IGN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales: The Brightest Star in the North". Disney Press. April 11, 2017. Archived from the original on May 21, 2017.
 "Disney Showcase 2016: GOTG Vol. 2, Pirates of the Caribbean 5, Queen of Katwe and more!". CriticalHit. August 24, 2016. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016.
 "Johnny Depp Surprises Pirates of the Caribbean Riders at Disneyland". EW.com. Retrieved August 15, 2024.
 Rahman, Abid (March 28, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales': First Reactions From CinemaCon Screening". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 27, 2021.
 Brzeski, Patrick (April 25, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' to World Premiere at Shanghai Disneyland". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017.
 McClintock, Pamela (January 20, 2016). "Star Wars: Episode VIII Gets New Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 20, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2021.
 Butler, Tom (October 3, 2016). "Johnny Depp absent from first Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge teaser trailer". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on October 4, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2021.
 Giardina, Carolyn (May 22, 2017). "'Pirates 5' to Be First Hollywood Feature to Play New Panoramic Cinema Format in U.S." The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2017.
 Keyes, Rob (May 15, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales IMAX Comparison". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2021.
 Fallon, Sean (July 17, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales 4K Blu-ray And Digital Release Dates Announced". Comicbook.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017.
 "Fifth 'Pirates' Movie Sails to Top of Home Video Sales". Home Media Magazine. October 12, 2017. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2017.
 Busch, Anita (May 28, 2017). "'Pirates' $208 Overseas Start And $275M Global Take Will Push Disney Franchise Past $4B Mark". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 29, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates 5' Clears $77M in U.S.; 'Baywatch' Capsizes With $23M". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 "'Dunkirk' Takes Box Office By Storm With $55.4M No. 1 Spot For $105M+ Global Opening; 'Valerian' $23.5M Start". Deadline Hollywood. July 23, 2017. Archived from the original on July 25, 2017. Retrieved July 24, 2017.
 Kelley, Seth (June 4, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Crosses $500 Million at Global Box Office". Variety. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017.
 "How Much Profit Will 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men' Tell?". Deadline Hollywood. May 30, 2017. Archived from the original on May 31, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony; Tartaglione, Nancy (May 24, 2017). "'Pirates' Hopes To Make Waves Around The World With $230M+ Launch – Memorial Day Weekend Box Office Preview". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Mendelson, Scott (May 27, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates Of The Caribbean' Snags Okay $23.4M Friday For $110M Global Cume". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 "Weekend Box Office Results for May 26–28, 2017". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean' 5 leads slow holiday weekend at box office". New York Daily News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 31, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2017.
 "Why 'Pirates' & 'Baywatch' Are Shipwrecked At The Domestic B.O. — Friday Night Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony; Busch, Anita (May 29, 2017). "How 'Pirates' & 'Baywatch' Are Casualties Of Summer Franchise Fatigue At The Domestic B.O. — Monday AM". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 7, 2017). "'Baywatch' Looking To Catch A Wave At The B.O. By Opening One Day Earlier". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017.
 "Box-Office Preview: 'Pirates 5,' 'Baywatch' Set Sail for Uncertain Shores". The Hollywood Reporter. May 24, 2017. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017.
 Kelley, Seth (May 28, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Hooks No. 1, 'Baywatch' Belly Flops". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017.
 Spiegel, Josh (May 27, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean': The Diminishing Returns of Johnny Depp". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 27, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 Mendelson, Scott (May 28, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates 5' Sails To Seaworthy $271 Million Worldwide Opening". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 Brevet, Brad (May 28, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Top Memorial Day Weekend Box Office as 'Baywatch' Struggles". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 Mendelson, Scott (June 3, 2017). "Friday Box Office: 'Pirates 5' Plunges 73%, 'Baywatch' And 'Alien' Tumble". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved June 4, 2017.
 Mendelson, Scott (June 4, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates 5' Sails Past $500M Worldwide, 'Baywatch' And 'Alien' Crumble". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017.
 "'Cars 3' $53M+ Is Third Best Debut For Pixar Series; 'Wonder Woman' Still Wows With $40M+; 'All Eyez On Me' Solid". Deadline Hollywood. June 18, 2017. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved June 18, 2017.
 "Why 'Transformers' Is Screaming For Reboot After $69M Start; 'Wonder Woman' & 'Cars 3' Fight Over 2nd Place". Deadline Hollywood. June 25, 2017. Archived from the original on June 26, 2017. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 "comScore Announces Official Worldwide Box Office Results for Weekend of May 28, 2017" (Press release). comScore. May 28, 2017. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (May 23, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Sailing Toward $80 Million, 'Baywatch' Eyes $40 Million". Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Papish, Jonathan (May 24, 2017). "Holiday Box Office: Dragon Boat Festival". China Film Insider. Archived from the original on February 13, 2019. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Kelley, Seth (May 28, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Sails Toward $300 Million Opening Weekend Worldwide". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 26, 2017). "'Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Says Ahoy To $34.5M In Offshore Start – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (June 4, 2017). "'Wonder Woman' Powers $122.5M Offshore, $223M Global In Debut – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 4, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017.
 McNary, Dave (May 26, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Sets Sail With $40 Million Worldwide". Variety. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 26, 2017.
 Kil, Sonia (May 28, 2017). "Korea Box Office: 'Pirates' Rules Weekend, 'President' Lands in Second". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 Tartaglione, Nancy (May 27, 2017). "'Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Says Ahoy To $86.5M – Int'l Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Brzeski, Patrick (May 28, 2017). "China Box Office: 'Pirates 5' Sails Off With $67.8M in Treasure". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 Frater, Patrick (May 28, 2017). "China Box Office: 'Pirates' Sails Off With $66 Million Opening". Variety. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017.
 Schilling, Mark (July 3, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Opens at No. 1 in Japan". Variety. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales – International Box Office – Japan". Box Office Mojo. July 16, 2017. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2024.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2020.
 McNary, Dave (May 26, 2017). "Box Office: 'Pirates' Sailing to $75 Million, 'Baywatch' Can't Make Memorial Day Waves". Variety. Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved December 26, 2020.
 Ryan, Mike (May 22, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5': A Confusing Revival". Uproxx. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Travers, Peter (May 23, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Review: Abandon Ship!". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 27, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017.
 Vishnevetsky, Ignatiy (May 23, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean slogs out to sea for the fifth time in Dead Men Tell No Tales". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on June 3, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017.
 Scott, A. O. (May 25, 2017). "Review: 'Dead Men Tell No Tales.' Not Very Well, Anyway". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 O'Sullivan, Michael (May 25, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales': Long, Loud and Overstimulating". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 LaSalle, Mick (May 25, 2017). "The New 'Pirates': Some Dead Things Can't Be Resurrected". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on May 28, 2017. Retrieved May 29, 2017.
 Roeper, Richard (May 23, 2017). "Smartly there! Latest 'Pirates of the Caribbean' picks up the pace". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on May 23, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017.
 Hammond, Pete (May 24, 2017). "'The Pirates Of The Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Review: Johnny Depp And A Couple Of Oscar Winners Help Keep This Fun Ride Afloat". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 2, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 Greenblatt, Leah (May 22, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales' Is Gorgeously Detailed Swashbuckling Nonsense". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 28, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2020.
 Esqueda, Ashley (May 22, 2017). "'Pirates 5' review: This time around, dead men tell good tales". CNET. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017.
 Truitt, Brian (May 22, 2017). "Review: Johnny Depp's 'Pirates of the Caribbean' rights ship with 'Dead Men'". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved June 27, 2017.
 Perez, Lexy (March 3, 2018). "Razzie Awards: 'Emoji Movie' Named Worst Picture of the Year". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved January 18, 2021.
 Giardina, Carolyn (November 16, 2017). "HPA Awards: Dunkirk Wins Best Editing in a Feature". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved March 3, 2023.
 Nordyke, Kimberly (August 13, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards: Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021.
 Gallagher, Brian (March 4, 2017). ""Pirates 5 May Not Be Captain Jack's Final Adventure!?"". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on March 7, 2017. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Zinski, Dan (September 4, 2017). "Pirates of the Caribbean 6 May Depend On Pirates 5 Home Release". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Leadbeater, Alex (October 2, 2017). "Kaya Scodelario Contracted To Return for Pirates of the Caribbean 6". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on June 2, 2020. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Evry, Max (October 3, 2017). "Joachim Rønning to Direct Angelina Jolie in Maleficent 2". Comingsoon.net. Evolve Media, LLC. Archived from the original on October 18, 2018. Retrieved September 26, 2018. He is also being eyed to helm a potential sixth Pirates movie.
 Schaffer, Sandy (August 6, 2018). "Disney Is Still Developing Pirates of the Caribbean 6". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on September 26, 2018. Retrieved September 26, 2018.
 Evans, Nick (September 21, 2018). "Why Keira Knightley Probably Won't Appear In Another Pirates Of The Caribbean Movie". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on August 13, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 23, 2018). "Disney Talking 'Pirates Of The Caribbean' Reboot With 'Deadpool' Scribes Rhett Reese & Paul Wernick". Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019.
 Boucher, Geoff (February 14, 2019). "Disney's 'Pirates' Reboot Uncertain As 'Deadpool' Writers Jump Ship". Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019.
 Gonzalez, Umberto (October 25, 2019). "Craig Mazin and Ted Elliott to Develop New 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Movie". The Wrap. Archived from the original on November 14, 2022. Retrieved May 29, 2023 – via Yahoo! Life.
 McNary, Dave (October 25, 2019). "'Chernobyl' Creator Craig Mazin to Develop 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Reboot". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2022. Retrieved September 29, 2022.
 Taylor, Drew (May 14, 2020). "Jerry Bruckheimer Unsure of Johnny Depp's Involvement in New 'Pirates' Sequel". Collider. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved December 28, 2020.
 Maddeus, Gene (April 20, 2022). "Johnny Depp: Disney Wanted to Cut Ties on 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 'To Be Safe'". Variety. Retrieved April 20, 2022.
 "Orlando Bloom Eager to Return as Will Turner for Pirates of the Caribbean 6". February 20, 2023.
 "Would Pirates of the Caribbean's Orlando Bloom Return to the Franchise?". February 20, 2023.
 "Orlando Bloom on Final Season of 'Carnival Row'—and Possibly Revisiting 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". Parade: Entertainment, Recipes, Health, Life, Holidays. February 17, 2023.
 "Keira Knightley Reacts to Returning to 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Franchise (Exclusive) | Entertainment Tonight". www.etonline.com. March 14, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023.
 Lloyd, Albertina (March 15, 2023). "Pirates of the Caribbean producer 'would love' Johnny Depp to return for sixth film". Yahoo! Entertainment. Retrieved May 22, 2023.
 France, Lisa Respers (December 20, 2022). "Jerry Bruckheimer would 'love' to have Johnny Depp back in 'Pirates' franchise". CNN. Retrieved May 22, 2023.
 Outlaw, Kofi (July 6, 2023). "Johnny Depp Reportedly Open to Working With Disney Again". Comicbook.com. Retrieved July 7, 2023.
 Riefe, Jordan (August 19, 2023). "Craig Mazin has next season's 'Last of Us' in his head. If only the strike would settle". Los Angeles Times.
 Ankers-Range, Adele (March 26, 2024). "Pirates of the Caribbean Producer Confirms Franchise Is Getting a 'Reboot' With Sixth Movie". IGN. Retrieved March 26, 2024.
 "Jerry Bruckheimer on 'Top Gun 3', 'Pirates' Reboot and Brad Pitt Formula 1 Racing Flick (Exclusive)".
 Romano, Nick (May 20, 2024). "Pirates of the Caribbean producer hopes to make both reboot and Margot Robbie film (exclusive)". Entertainment Weekly.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales.
Official website
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales at IMDb
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales at Rotten Tomatoes Edit this at Wikidata
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales at Disney A to Z Edit this at Wikidata
vte
Pirates of the Caribbean
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
Portals:
flag United States
 Film
icon Speculative fiction
icon Fantasy
icon Oceans
icon Disney
icon 2010s
Categories: 2017 films2017 3D films2010s action adventure films2010s American films2010s English-language films2010s fantasy action films2010s fantasy adventure films2010s ghost films4DX filmsAmerican 3D filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican fantasy action filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAmerican films about revengeAmerican ghost filmsAmerican sequel filmsD-Box motion-enhanced filmsEnglish-language action adventure filmsEnglish-language fantasy action filmsEnglish-language fantasy adventure filmsFilms about treasure huntingFilms about witchcraftFilms directed by Espen SandbergFilms directed by Joachim RønningFilms produced by Jerry BruckheimerFilms scored by Geoff ZanelliFilms set in 1751Films set in the CaribbeanFilms set on fictional islandsFilms set on shipsFilms shot at Village Roadshow StudiosFilms shot in QueenslandFilms shot in VancouverFilms with screenplays by Jeff NathansonFilms with screenplays by Terry RossioFilms set in the 18th centuryFlying DutchmanIMAX filmsJerry Bruckheimer Films filmsPirates of the Caribbean (film series) filmsScreenX filmsWalt Disney Pictures films
This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 20:42 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales

54 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Filming
Visual effects
Music
Marketing
Release

Theatrical
Home media
Reception

Box office
Critical response
Accolades
Video game
Sequel
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the film. For the video game, see Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (video game). For the soundtrack, see Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (soundtrack).
Pirates of the Caribbean:
Dead Man's Chest

Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Gore Verbinski
Written by	
Ted Elliott
Terry Rossio
Based on	
Characters
by Ted Elliott
    Terry Rossio
    Stuart Beattie
    Jay Wolpert
Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	
Johnny Depp
Orlando Bloom
Keira Knightley
Stellan Skarsgård
Bill Nighy
Jack Davenport
Kevin R. McNally
Jonathan Pryce
Cinematography	Dariusz Wolski
Edited by	
Craig Wood
Stephen Rivkin
Music by	Hans Zimmer
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Buena Vista Pictures Distribution
Release dates	
June 24, 2006 (Disneyland Resort)
July 7, 2006 (United States)
Running time	151 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$225 million[2]
Box office	$1.066 billion[2]
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest is a 2006 American fantasy swashbuckler film directed by Gore Verbinski, written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio, and produced by Jerry Bruckheimer. The sequel to Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003), it is the second installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series. It is set a year after said film, and follows Captain Jack Sparrow who owes a debt to Davy Jones (Bill Nighy), the ghastly captain of the Flying Dutchman, and being marked for death and pursued by the Kraken. Meanwhile, the wedding of Will Turner (Orlando Bloom) and Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley) is interrupted by Lord Cutler Beckett (Tom Hollander), who wants Turner to acquire Jack's magic compass in a bid to find the Dead Man's Chest.

Two sequels to Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl were conceived in 2004, with Elliott and Rossio developing a story arc that would span both films. Filming took place from February to September 2005 in Palos Verdes, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Dominica, and The Bahamas, as well as on sets constructed at Walt Disney Studios. It was shot back-to-back with the third film of the series, At World's End (2007). With a production budget of $225 million, it was the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release.

Dead Man's Chest premiered at the Disneyland Resort on June 24, 2006, and was released in the United States on July 7, to mixed reviews from critics. The film broke several records at the time, including the opening-weekend record in the United States with $136 million and the fastest film to gross over $1 billion at the worldwide box office (63 days), and became the highest-grossing film of 2006, the third highest-grossing film of all time at the time of its release, and the highest-grossing film in the series. It was also the highest-grossing film released by Disney until it was surpassed by Toy Story 3 in 2010. The film received four nominations at the 79th Academy Awards (winning Best Visual Effects).

Plot
Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann's wedding is interrupted by Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Company, who arrives at Port Royal with arrest warrants, charging them for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow's escape.[a] Despite also having a warrant, Commodore James Norrington resigned from the Royal Navy and disappeared after losing his ship, the HMS Dauntless, in a hurricane while pursuing Jack.

Meanwhile, aboard the Black Pearl, Jack is visited by Will's father, Bootstrap Bill Turner, who is now a crewman of the Flying Dutchman, captained by Davy Jones. He marks Jack with the Black Spot and reminds him that he previously bartered a deal with Jones to raise the Pearl from the depths in exchange for his freedom; a debt Jack failed to repay, and must now serve aboard the Dutchman or he will be dragged into Davy Jones' Locker by the Kraken. Meanwhile, revealing Letters of Marque intended for Jack Sparrow signed by King George, Beckett offers to free Will and Elizabeth in exchange for Will recovering Sparrow's compass.

Will finds Jack and his crew on an island and helps them escape from cannibals. Afterward, Jack visits voodoo priestess Tia Dalma, who helps in finding the Dead Man's Chest, which holds Davy Jones' still-beating heart; whoever has it can control Davy Jones. Jack intends to find it and free himself from Jones' debt. Will makes a deal with Jack to find the key to the chest in return for Jack's compass, but is tricked into servitude with Jones' crew aboard the Dutchman in Jack's stead. Jones agrees to free Sparrow from servitude if he can provide 99 more souls. Will reunites with his father, Bootstrap Bill, aboard the Dutchman and learns that Jones possesses the key through Liar's Dice. Will escapes with the key and climbs aboard the Edinburgh Trader. Jones summons the Kraken and sinks the ship, but Will manages to escape.

Meanwhile, Elizabeth's father, Governor Swann, breaks her out of prison but is captured himself. Elizabeth steals the Letters of Marque from Beckett and makes her way to Tortuga, where she finds both Jack and a drunken Norrington. Jack tricks Elizabeth into using his compass to find Jones' chest. All parties arrive on Isla Cruces, where the chest is buried. A three-way sword fight breaks out between Jack, Will, and Norrington, who all want the heart for their respective goals: Jack wants to call off the Kraken and negate his debt to Jones; Will wants to release his father from the Dutchman; and Norrington intends to regain his life as a Navy officer. Norrington secretly steals the heart and the Letters of Marque in the chaos before running off, pretending to lure away the Dutchman crew. Jones and the Kraken attack the Pearl, killing most of the crew and destroying all but one of the Pearl's lifeboats. Jack uses the boat to flee the battle briefly, but returns to help wound the Kraken with a net full of gunpowder and rum.

Jack orders the survivors to abandon ship, but Elizabeth realizes the Kraken only wants Jack. Elizabeth tricks Jack by chaining him to the mast so the crew can escape while the Kraken drags Jack and the Pearl to the depths. Seemingly satisfied that Sparrow's debt is settled, Davy Jones opens the chest to find his heart missing. Norrington gives Beckett the Letters and Jones's heart, reinstating him in the Navy and allowing the East India Trading Company to gain control of Davy Jones, the "Flying Dutchman," and the Kraken. Jack's crew returns to Tia Dalma, where they agree about the possibility of rescuing Sparrow at "world's end". Tia Dalma introduces their guide: the resurrected Hector Barbossa.

Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members and characters
Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow: The eccentric pirate captain of the Black Pearl. He is hunted by the Kraken because of his unpaid debt to Davy Jones. He is also searching for the Dead Man's Chest to free himself from Jones' servitude.
Orlando Bloom as William Turner: A blacksmith-turned-pirate who strikes a deal with Cutler Beckett to find Jack Sparrow and his compass so he can save both himself and his fiancée Elizabeth from execution. Later he is reunited with, and seeks to free, his father, who eventually owes a lifetime of servitude to Davy Jones.
Keira Knightley as Elizabeth Swann: Governor Swann's daughter and Will's fiancée, who is arrested on her wedding day for helping Captain Jack Sparrow escape. Escaping jail with help from her father, she meets up with Jack in Tortuga and joins his crew to search for both Will and the chest.
Stellan Skarsgård as William "Bootstrap Bill" Turner: A crewman aboard the Flying Dutchman who happens to be Will Turner's father. He was cursed by the Aztec gold on Isla de Muerta (along with Hector Barbossa's crew). Thrown overboard after refusing to take part in the mutiny against Jack led by Barbossa, he spent years bound to a cannon beneath the crushing ocean. Found by Davy Jones, he swore to servitude aboard the Flying Dutchman crew and escaped death.
Bill Nighy as Davy Jones: Captain of the Flying Dutchman. Davy Jones was once a human being. Unable to bear the pain of losing his true love, he carved out his heart and put it into the Dead Man's Chest, then buried it in a secret location. He has become a bizarre creature – part octopus, part crab, part man – and collects the souls of dead or dying sailors to serve aboard his ship for one hundred years. Prior to officially casting Bill Nighy, producers also met Jim Broadbent, Iain Glen and Richard E. Grant for the role.[3] Other actors considered for the role included Christopher Walken and Ian McShane, with the latter being cast later as Blackbeard in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.[4]
Jack Davenport as James Norrington: He resigned his commission as Commodore in the Royal Navy after losing his ship and crew in a hurricane off the coast of Tripoli in the pursuit of Jack Sparrow and his crew. Fallen on hard times, he joins the Black Pearl's crew and seeks to regain his honor and career.
Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: The Black Pearl's first mate and Jack's loyal friend, he once served in the Royal Navy under Lieutenant James Norrington.
Jonathan Pryce as Governor Weatherby Swann. Elizabeth's father and governor of Port Royal. He adores his daughter but puts little faith in Will - not considering him the best match for Elizabeth.
Lee Arenberg as Pintel: Ragetti's inseparable crewmate.
Mackenzie Crook as Ragetti: A pirate and former Black Pearl crewmember under Captain Barbossa, he was imprisoned after the Aztec curse was broken, but escaped to rejoin Captain Jack Sparrow's Black Pearl crew. He has a wooden eye, and despite being illiterate, has begun "reading" the Bible, with the excuse that "you get credit for trying".
Tom Hollander as Lord Cutler Beckett: Chairman of the East India Trading Company, he travels to Port Royal to capture and recruit Jack Sparrow as a privateer. What he really desires is Davy Jones' heart, with which he can rule the seas with Jones' commanded servitude. Ricky Gervais was offered the role but turned it down.[5]
Naomie Harris as Tia Dalma: An obeah priestess who Jack bartered with for his magic compass. She explains the legend of Davy Jones, in addition to owning a similar locket to his.
Alex Norton as Captain Bellamy, the pirate captain of the Edinburgh Trader.
David Bailie as Cotton, a mute member of the Black Pearl's crew.
Martin Klebba as Marty, a dwarf member of the Black Pearl's crew.
David Schofield as Mercer, Lord Beckett's second in command
John Boswall as Wyvern, an ancient member of Davy Jones’ crew who has fused with the ship.
Derrick O'Connor as Very Old Man, an inexperienced sailor in Jack Sparrow's crew.
Geoffrey Rush as Hector Barbossa, the former captain of the Black Pearl and Jack Sparrow's former first mate. An uncredited role, having originally met his demise in the previous installment, Barbossa is revealed to have been resurrected by Tia Dalma in the final scene of this film.
Production
Development
Following the success of Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003), the cast and crew signed on for two more sequels to be shot back-to-back,[6] a practical decision on Disney's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew.[7] Writer Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio decided not to make the sequels new adventures featuring the same characters, as with the Indiana Jones and James Bond series, but to retroactively turn The Curse of the Black Pearl into the first of a trilogy.[8] They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann's embrace at the end of the first film, and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device.[9] They settled on introducing Davy Jones, the Flying Dutchman and the Kraken. They also introduced the historical East India Trading Company, who for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates.[10]

Planning began in June 2004, and production was much larger than The Curse of the Black Pearl, which was only shot on location in St. Vincent.[11] This time, the sequels would require fully working ships, with a seaworthy Black Pearl built over the body of the Sunset, an unglamorous craft which once serviced oil derricks in the Gulf of Mexico constructed in Bayou La Batre, Alabama.[12] By November, the script was still unfinished as the writers did not want director Gore Verbinski and producer Jerry Bruckheimer to compromise what they had written, so Verbinski worked with James Byrkit to storyboard major sequences without need of a script, while Elliott and Rossio wrote a "preparatory" script for the crew to use before they finished the script they were happy with. By January 2005, with rising costs and no script, Disney executives threatened to cancel the film, but changed their minds. The writers would accompany the crew on location, feeling that the lateness of their rewrites would improve the spontaneity of the cast's performances.[9]

Filming

The two bone cages used in one of the early scenes of the film. The cages were on display on the Studio Backlot Tour at Disney's Hollywood Studios until it shut down in 2014.
Principal photography began on February 28, 2005,[12] in Palos Verdes, beginning with Elizabeth's ruined wedding day.[9] For Cutler Beckett's introduction, Rossio and Elliott had him arrive on shore in a boat while sitting on a horse standing in the boat; the duo had originally planned to use this introduction for Don Rafael Montero in The Mask of Zorro (1998), but the scene was cut for being deemed too expensive. Similarly, the Pirates crew wanted to cut the idea for budget reasons, in addition to feel that it would be unbelievable, or as the film's historian dismissed, suicidal. However, Verbinski promised Rossio and Elliott to use the idea and the scene was filmed in one day after weeks of planning and training.[13] The crew spent the first shooting days at Walt Disney Studios in Los Angeles, including the interiors of the Black Pearl and the Edinburgh Trader which Elizabeth stows away on,[12] before moving to St. Vincent to shoot the scenes in Port Royal and Tortuga. Sets from the previous film were reused, having survived three hurricanes, although the main pier had to be rebuilt as it had collapsed in November. The crew had four tall ships at their disposal to populate the backgrounds, which were painted differently on each side for economy.[7] One of the ships used was the replica of HMS Bounty used in the 1962 film adaptation of Mutiny on the Bounty.[14][15]

On April 18, 2005,[16] the crew began shooting at Dominica, a location Verbinski had selected as he felt it fitted the sense of remoteness he was looking for.[9] However, this was also a problem; the Dominican government were completely unprepared for the scale of a Hollywood production, and the 500-strong crew occupying around 90% of the roads on the island had trouble moving around on the underdeveloped surfaces. The weather also alternated between torrential rainstorms and hot temperatures, the latter of which was made worse for the cast who had to wear period clothing. At Dominica, the sequences involving Pelegosto (Cannibal Island) and the forest segment of the battle on Isla Cruces were shot. Verbinski preferred to use practical props for the giant wheel and bone cage sequences, feeling long close-up shots would help further suspend the audience's disbelief.[7] Dominica was also used for Tia Dalma's shack. Filming on the island concluded on May 26, 2005.[17]

The crew moved to a small island in the Bahamas called White Cay for the beginning and end of the Isla Cruces battle,[7] before production took a break until August, where in Los Angeles the interiors of the Flying Dutchman were shot.[18] On September 18, 2005,[19] the crew moved to Grand Bahama Island to shoot ship exteriors, including the working Black Pearl and Flying Dutchman. Filming there was a tumultuous period, starting with the fact that the tank had not actually been finished. The hurricane season caused many pauses in shooting, and Hurricane Wilma damaged many of the accessways and pumps, though no one was hurt nor were any of the ships destroyed.[7] Principal photography was reportedly completed on September 10, 2005.[citation needed] According to Ted Elliott, production wrapped on February 7, 2006,[20] with the last shot made was the raven pecking on Jack Sparrow's coffin.[21] This was after two weeks of filming night scenes, from sunset to sunrise.[22]

The look of the Flying Dutchman was partially inspired by old Dutch "fluyts"—17th-century vessels which resembled galleons—and more specifically, the Vasa, a massive Swedish warship which sank in Stockholm's harbor upon its maiden voyage in 1628 (the ship was salvaged in 1961 and housed in a special museum in the Swedish capital). With its high, heavily ornamented stern, the ship provided a rich foundation for Rick Heinrichs' wilder and more fantastical designs.[23][24]

One of the stuntmen, Johnny Depp's stunt double Tony Angelotti, was injured on set while filming a "human yo-yo" stunt in July 2005. He was rushed to hospital, suffering internal bleeding after "nicking" a branch off his femoral artery. He lost six units of blood, had an ACL reconstruction and spent a year in recovery, before having to have the surgery all over again when a plate in his pelvis broke. He also suffered from PTSD. Despite this, he did continue filming for the following sequel, At World's End, albeit doing "lighter stunts" like sword choreography or working as a stunt coordinator. However, in 2007, Tony Angelotti did sue Disney and Jerry Bruckheimer for the injury.[25][26]

Visual effects

The three stages of rendering Bill Nighy's character.
The Flying Dutchman's crew members were originally conceived by writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio as ghosts, but Gore Verbinski disliked this and designed them as physical creatures.[27] Their hierarchy is reflected by how mutated they were: newcomers had low level infections which resemble rosacea, while veterans had full-blown undersea creature attributes. Verbinski wanted to keep them realistic, rejecting a character with a turtle shell, and the animators watched various David Attenborough documentaries to study the movement of sea anemones and mussels.[28] All of the crew are computer-generated, with the exception of Stellan Skarsgård, who played "Bootstrap" Bill Turner. Initially his prosthetics would be augmented with CGI but that was abandoned.[29] Skarsgård spent four hours in the make-up chair and was dubbed "Bouillabaisse" on set.[30]

Davy Jones had originally been designed with chin growths, before the designers made the move to full-blown tentacles;[31] the skin of the character incorporates the texture of a coffee-stained Styrofoam cup among other elements. To portray Jones on set, Bill Nighy wore a motion capture tracksuit that meant the animators at Industrial Light & Magic did not have to reshoot the scene in the studio without him or on the motion capture stage. Nighy wore make-up around his eyes and mouth to splice into the computer-generated shots, but the images of his eyes and mouth were not used. Nighy only wore a prosthetic once, with blue-colored tentacles for when Will Turner (Orlando Bloom) steals the key to the Dead Man's Chest from under his "beard" as he sleeps. To create the CGI version of the character, the model was closely based on a full-body scan of Nighy, with Jones reflecting his high cheekbones. Animators studied every frame of Nighy's performance: the actor himself had blessed them by making his performance more quirky than expected, providing endless fun for them. His performance also meant new controls had to be stored. Finally, Jones' tentacles are mostly a simulation, though at times they were hand-animated when they act as limbs for the character.[32]

The Kraken was difficult to animate as it had no real-life reference, until animation director Hal Hickel instructed the crew to watch King Kong vs. Godzilla which featured a live octopus crawling over miniatures.[33]: 2  On the set, two pipes filled with 30,000 pounds (14,000 kg) of cement were used to crash and split the Edinburgh Trader: Completing the illusion are miniature masts and falling stuntmen shot on a bluescreen stage. The scene where the Kraken spits at Jack Sparrow does not use computer-generated spit: it was real slime thrown at Depp.[34]

Music
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (soundtrack)
Marketing

Pirates wins the final leg
The first trailer was attached to The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. Disney produced a comic book adaption in their Junior Graphic Novels: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2007).[35][36] Disney sponsored a racing yacht in the 2005 event[37] of the Volvo Ocean Race. The boat, aptly named Black Pearl, raced under the team name "Pirates of the Caribbean" for the United States. The boat itself was a Volvo Open 70 class yacht designed by Farr Yacht Design. She was skippered to a 2nd-place finish by American Paul Cayard after 31,000 nm (57,000 km), divided into 9 legs, taking 8 months to complete.

Release
Theatrical

Johnny Depp at the London premiere for the film in June 2006
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest premiered at Disneyland in California on June 24, 2006.[38] It was the first Disney film to use the computer-generated Walt Disney Pictures logo from 2006 to 2022, which took a year for the studio to design.[39] Wētā FX and yU+co were responsible for the logo's final animated rendering and Mark Mancina was hired to score a new composition and arrangement of "When You Wish Upon a Star".[39] The new fanfare was co-arranged and orchestrated by David Metzger. The main people responsible for the logo's rendering are Cyrese Parrish and Cameron Smith.

Home media
The film became available on DVD on November 20, 2006, in the UK and December 5, 2006, in the US. It sold 9,498,304 units in its first week of sales (equivalent to $174,039,324). In total it sold 16,694,937 units, earning $320,871,909. It was the best-selling DVD of 2006 in terms of units sold and second in terms of sales revenue behind The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.[40]

The DVD contained a commentary track with the screenwriters and a gag reel, with the double-disc featuring a video of the film premiere and a number of documentaries, including a full-length documentary entitled "According to the Plan" and eight featurettes. The film was released on Blu-ray Disc on May 22, 2007.[41] The film had its UK Television premiere on Boxing Day 2008 on BBC One at 20:30. It was seen by 6.8 million viewers according to overnight figures.[42]

Reception
Box office
Dead Man's Chest earned $423,315,812 in North America and $642,863,913 in other territories, for a worldwide total of $1,066,179,725.[2] Worldwide, it ranks as the 15th highest-grossing film distributed by Disney,[43] the highest-grossing film of 2006, and the highest-grossing film in the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[44] It was the third film in history to reach the $1 billion mark worldwide and the first Disney film to reach $1 billion worldwide, and it reached the mark in record time (63 days),[45] a record that has since been surpassed by many films, of which the first was Avatar (in January 2010).[46]

In North America, the film broke many records including the largest opening- and single-day gross ($55.8 million), the biggest opening-weekend gross ($135.6 million),[47] the least time to reach $100,[47] $200 and $300 million[48] and the highest ten-day gross, dethroning Spider-Man, which held those records in 2002.[49] However, most of them were broken by Spider-Man 3 in May 2007[50] and The Dark Knight in July 2008. The film was in first place at the box office for three consecutive weekends,[51] making it one of the only two films of the year to achieve this feat, with the other being Happy Feet.[52] By late August 2006, it would go on to break Finding Nemo's record for becoming Disney's highest-grossing film at the time.[53] It closed in theaters on December 7, 2006, with a $423.3 million haul.[54] Thus, in North America, it is the seventeenth-highest-grossing film, although, adjusted for inflation, the film ranks forty-eight. It is also the highest-grossing 2006 film,[55] the highest-grossing Pirates of the Caribbean film,[44] and the seventh-highest-grossing Disney film.[56] The film sold an estimated 64,628,400 tickets in the US.[57]

Outside North America, it is the twenty-first-highest-grossing film,[58] the third-highest-grossing Pirates film, the eighth-highest-grossing Disney film[59] and the highest-grossing film of 2006.[60] It set opening-weekend records in Russia and the CIS, Ukraine, Finland, Malaysia, Singapore,[61] Greece[62] and Italy.[63][64] It was on top of the box office outside North America for 9 consecutive weekends and 10 in total.[65] It was the highest-grossing film of 2006 in Australia,[66] Bulgaria,[67] Germany,[68] Japan,[69] the Netherlands,[70] New Zealand,[71] Spain,[72] Sweden[73] and Thailand.[74]

Critical response
On Rotten Tomatoes, Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest has an approval rating of 53% based on 229 reviews, with an average rating of 6.00/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Gone is Depp's unpredictability and much of the humor and originality of the first movie."[75] At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating to reviews, the film received an average score of 53 out of 100, based on 37 critics, indicating "mixed to average reviews".[76] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale.[77]

Michael Booth of The Denver Post gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, calling it "two hours and 20 minutes of escapism that once again makes the movies safe for guilt-free fun."[78] Drew McWeeny compared the film to The Empire Strikes Back, and also acclaimed its darkness in its depiction of the crew of the Flying Dutchman and its cliffhanger.[79] The completely computer-generated Davy Jones turned out to be so realistic that some reviewers mistakenly identified Nighy as wearing prosthetic makeup.[80][81]

A. O. Scott of The New York Times said, "You put down your money – still less than $10 in most cities – and in return you get two and a half hours of spirited swashbuckling, and Gore Verbinski has an appropriate sense of mischief, as a well as a gift, nearly equaling those of Peter Jackson and Steven Spielberg, for integrating CGI seamlessly into his cinematic compositions."[82] Empire gave the film three out of five stars, stating, "Depp is once again an unmitigated joy as Captain Sparrow, delivering another eye-darting, word-slurring turn with some wonderful slapstick flourishes. Indeed, Rossio and Elliot smartly exploit these in some wonderful action set-pieces." "We don't get the predictable 'all friends together on the same quest' structure, and there's a surfeit of surprises, crosses and double-crosses and cheeky character beats which stay true to the original's anti-heroic sense of fun. After all, Jack Sparrow is a pirate, a bad guy in a hero's hat, a man driven by self-gain over concern for the greater good, who will run away from a fight and cheat his 'friends' without a second's thought."[83]

Paul Arendt of the BBC compared it to The Matrix Reloaded, as a complex film that merely led onto the next film.[84] Richard George felt a "better construct of Dead Man's Chest and At World's End would have been to take 90 minutes of Chest, mix it with all of End and then cut that film in two."[85] Alex Billington felt the third film "almost makes the second film in the series obsolete or dulls it down enough that we can accept it in our trilogy DVD collections without ever watching it."[86] Mark Kermode of The Observer accused the film of "lumpen direction, lousy writing and pouting performances", but wrote that "the worst thing about Dead Man's Chest is its interminable length [...] The entire Pirates of the Caribbean franchise may be a horrible indicator of the decline of narrative cinema."[87]

Accolades
See also: List of accolades received by the Pirates of the Caribbean
At the 79th Academy Awards, visual effects supervisors John Knoll, Hal Hickel, Charles Gibson, and Allen Hall won an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects which was also the first time since 1994's Forrest Gump that Industrial Light & Magic had received that particular Academy Award. The film was also nominated for Best Art Direction, Sound Editing, and Sound Mixing.[88]

The film also won a BAFTA and Satellite award for Best Visual Effects,[89] and six awards from the Visual Effects Society.[90]

Other awards won by the film include Choice Movie: Action, Choice Movie Actor: Action for Johnny Depp at the Favorite Movie, Movie Drama, Male Actor for Depp and On-Screen Couple for Depp and Keira Knightley at the 33rd People's Choice Awards; Best Movie and Performance for Depp at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards and Best Special Effects at the Saturn Awards, and Favorite Movie at the 2007 Kids' Choice Awards.[91]

Video game
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (video game)
A video game adaptation of the film was developed by Griptonite Games and Amaze Entertainment and released by Buena Vista Games in June–August 2006 for the PlayStation Portable, Nintendo DS and Game Boy Advance.

Sequel
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End
Notes
 As depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl
References
 "Pirates of the Caribbean - Dead Man's Chest". British Board of Film Classification. June 23, 2006. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved February 3, 2009.
 Grant, Richard E. (2006). The Wah-Wah Diaries: The Making of a Film. Chatham, Kent: Picador. ISBN 978-0-330-44197-1.
 "'Pirates 2' DVD Unlocks Davy Jones". Chicago Tribune. December 4, 2006.
 "The Lost Roles of Ricky Gervais". January 19, 2012. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021.
 Brian Linder (October 21, 2003). "Back-to-Back Pirates". IGN. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007.
 According to Plan: The Harrowing and True Story of Dead Man's Chest (DVD). Buena Vista. 2006.
 Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio (2006). Audio Commentary (DVD). Buena Vista.
 Charting the Return (DVD). Buena Vista. 2006.
 "Everything Relates Back to What Started Everything Off in the First". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 "2005 (and '06): A Pirate Odyssey". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 "Los Angeles: The Voyage Begins". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Wordplayer.com: WORDPLAY/Archives/"Caribbean Tales - 2005" by Terry Rossio". July 6, 2005. Archived from the original on February 24, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2021.
 "Brando's bounty's sailing in." Bristol Evening Post. Pg. 6. July 5, 2007.
 "Logsdon rows to the occasion." Matthew Horn Matthew Horn News Herald Pg.1 (Port Clinton, Ohio). June 26, 2007.
 "Shooting in Isle of Beauty, Isle of Splendor". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Beware of Falling Coconuts: Adventures in Dominica". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 ""Please Do Not Feed the Iguanas": The Exumas, and an L.A. Sojourn". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Back to the Bahamas, Hurricanes and All". Production Notes. Archived from the original on September 4, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Ted Elliott. "MOVIES Message Board – ARCHIVE 7". Wordplay Forums. Retrieved February 9, 2006. We wrapped production on POTC: Dead Man's Chest on Tuesday, at about 5:45 am. One down ...
 Ted Elliott. "MOVIES Message Board – ARCHIVE 7". Wordplay Forums. Retrieved February 9, 2006. A raven pecking on a ... oh, that would be a spoiler : ) @
 Ted Elliott. "MOVIES Message Board – ARCHIVE 7". Wordplay Forums. Retrieved February 15, 2006. Two weeks straight, sunset to sunrise @
 IGN: Pirates 2 Exclusive: Davy's Sinister Ship
 POTC2 Presskit
 "Stuntman sues over 'Pirates' injury". Los Angeles Times. August 4, 2007.
 "Johnny Depp's Pirates stunt double on career-ending injury and bond with actor". August 28, 2020.
 Iain Blair (July 1, 2006). "Cover story: 'pirates of the caribbean: dead man's chest'". Post. Archived from the original on August 27, 2013. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Rebecca Murray. "John Knoll Talks About the Visual Effects in the Pirates Movies". About.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2013. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 Jason Matloff. "Scene Stealer: Stellan Skarsgård". Premiere. Archived from the original on June 8, 2007. Retrieved June 5, 2007.
 Sam Ashurst (May 14, 2007). "Orlando and Keira: Uncut!". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 9, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Edward Douglas (June 12, 2006). "Exclusive: Pirates' Bill "Davy Jones" Nighy". Comingsoon.net. Archived from the original on June 10, 2008. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Meet Davy Jones: Anatomy of a Legend (DVD). Buena Vista. 2006.
 Rebecca Murray (November 3, 2006). "Behind the Scenes of the "Pirates of the Caribbean" Movies". About.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 Creating the Kraken (DVD). Buena Vista. 2006.
 Disney Junior Graphic Novels: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original)
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (Disney Junior Graphic Novel #4)". Goodreads. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2016.
 "The race for ' Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest'". March 21, 2005. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved January 9, 2017.
 "Another Round For 'Pirates'". www.cbsnews.com. June 26, 2006. Retrieved August 4, 2023.
 "Old Disney magic in new animated logo". hollywoodreporter.com. Archived from the original on July 18, 2006. Retrieved July 10, 2006.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest – DVD Sales". Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved March 17, 2007.
 "Disney Sets 'Pirates,' 'Cars' Blu-ray Dates". High-Def Digest. January 24, 2007. Archived from the original on February 11, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2007.
 John Plunkett (December 29, 2008). "TV ratings - 26 December: Pirates of the Caribbean is ratings treasure for the BBC". the Guardian. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.
 "WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean". boxofficemojo.com. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013.
 "Around the World Roundup: 'Cars' Dethrones Billion-Dollar 'Pirates'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "Weekend Report: 'Avatar' Rocks New Year's". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "'Pirates' Raid Record Books". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2012.
 "'Pirates' Loot Piles Up, 'Lady' Walks Plank". Box Office Mojo. July 24, 2006. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2012.
 "'Pirates' Pilfer More Records". Box Office Mojo. July 17, 2006. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2012.
 "'Spider-Man 3' Soars into Record Books". Box Office Mojo. May 7, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2012.
 Gray, Brandon (July 24, 2006). "'Pirates' Loot Piles Up, 'Lady' Walks Plank". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2012.
 Friedman, Josh (December 4, 2006). "Cool characters on hot streaks at box office". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 28, 2022.
 "In brief: Dead Man's Chest is Disney's biggest treasure". The Guardian. August 21, 2006.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "2006 DOMESTIC GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved February 11, 2012.
 "BUENA VISTA". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved April 9, 2017.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2016.
 "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". boxofficemojo.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013.
 "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". boxofficemojo.com. Archived from the original on September 7, 2013.
 "2006 Overseas Total Yearly Box Office Results". boxofficemojo.com. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012.
 "Around the World Roundup: 'Pirates' Dominates Again". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "Around the World Roundup: Yo Ho, Yo Ho, Eight in a Row". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "Around the World Roundup: 'Pirates' Reclaims Crown with Italian Record". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved April 8, 2010.
 "Around the World Roundup: 'Pirates' Swishes to Nine Straight". Box Office Mojo. September 6, 2006. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2011.
 "Australia Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012.
 "Bulgaria Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 6, 2011.
 "Germany Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012.
 "Japan Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017.
 "Netherlands Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012.
 "New Zealand and Fiji Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011.
 "Spain Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 20, 2011.
 "Sweden Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012.
 "Thailand Yearly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 14, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. July 7, 2006. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2021.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2010.
 "CinemaScore". Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018.
 Michael Booth (July 6, 2005). "Aye, mates: "Pirates" sequel is worth the doubloons". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2006.
 Drew McWeeny (June 25, 2005). "Moriarty Reviews PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN 2: DEAD MAN'S CHEST!!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on December 9, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Russ Breimeier. "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". Christianity Today. Archived from the original on July 12, 2006. Retrieved May 29, 2006.
 Ryan Gilbey (July 10, 2006). "Sun, sea, sand and horror". New Statesman. UK. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Scott, A. O. (July 7, 2006). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest - Review - Movies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018.
 "Empire's Pirates of the Caribbean Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest Movie Review". Empireonline.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved July 6, 2013.
 Paul Arendt (July 7, 2006). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006)". BBC. Archived from the original on March 29, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Richard George (May 24, 2007). "Comics at World's End: Adapting Pirates of the Caribbean". IGN. Archived from the original on October 18, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Alex Billington (May 22, 2007). "Get Ready for a Swarm of Negative Critics This Friday on Pirates 3". Firstshowing.net. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2007.
 Kermode, Mark (July 9, 2006). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021.
 "The 79th Academy Awards (2007) Nominees and Winners". oscars.org. Archived from the original on September 29, 2012. Retrieved November 20, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest Awards". Allmovie. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 "Visual Effects Society Fifth Annual V.E.S. Awards Announced". Visual Effects Society. February 11, 2007. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Awards for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest". IMDb. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved September 17, 2007.
External links

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest.
Official website
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at IMDb
Dead Man's Chest title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at Metacritic Edit this at Wikidata
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at Box Office Mojo
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at Rotten Tomatoes
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest at the IMSDb
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest Production Notes
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Awards for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Portals:
 Film
flag United States
icon Speculative fiction
icon Fantasy
icon Oceans
icon Disney
 2000s
Categories: 2006 films2000s action adventure films2000s American films2000s British films2000s English-language films2000s fantasy action films2000s fantasy adventure filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican comedy filmsAmerican coming-of-age filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAmerican sequel filmsAmerican swashbuckler filmsBAFTA winners (films)British action filmsBritish adventure filmsBritish sequel filmsDemons in filmEnglish-language action adventure filmsEnglish-language fantasy action filmsEnglish-language fantasy adventure filmsFilms about cannibalismFilms about treasure huntingFilms about VoodooFilms about witchcraftFilms adapted into comicsFilms directed by Gore VerbinskiFilms scored by Hans ZimmerFilms set in the 1720sFilms set in the 18th centuryFilms set in the CaribbeanFilms set on shipsFilms shot in the BahamasFilms shot in DominicaFilms shot in Saint Vincent and the GrenadinesFilms that won the Best Visual Effects Academy AwardFilms using motion captureFilms with screenplays by Ted ElliottFilms with screenplays by Terry RossioFlying DutchmanJerry Bruckheimer Films filmsKraken in popular cultureNickelodeon Kids' Choice Award–winning filmsPirates of the Caribbean (film series) filmsSatellite Award–winning filmsSaturn Award–winning filmsTeen Choice Award winning filmsWalt Disney Pictures films
This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 21:30 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest

72 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Writing
Casting
Filming
Effects
Music
Marketing
Release

Theatrical
Home media
Reception

Box office
North America
Outside North America
Critical response
Accolades
Sequel
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Pirates 4" redirects here. For the 3D short film, see Pirates 4-D. For the soundtrack, see Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (soundtrack).
Pirates of the Caribbean:
On Stranger Tides
The film's main character Jack Sparrow stands on a beach. He wears a red bandana, a dark blue vest, white shirt, and black pants. Attached to his belt are two guns and a scarf. A ship with flaming sails approaches from the sea. In the background, three mermaids sit on a rock. The main actors' names are at the top, and the film credits at the bottom.
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Rob Marshall
Written by	
Ted Elliott
Terry Rossio
Based on	
Characters
by Ted Elliott
    Terry Rossio
    Stuart Beattie
    Jay Wolpert
Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
On Stranger Tides
by Tim Powers
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	
Johnny Depp
Penélope Cruz
Ian McShane
Kevin R. McNally
Geoffrey Rush
Cinematography	Dariusz Wolski
Edited by	
David Brenner
Wyatt Smith
Music by	Hans Zimmer
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release dates	
May 7, 2011 (Disneyland Resort)
May 20, 2011 (United States)
Running time	137 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	
$410.6 million (gross)
$378.5 million (net)[2]
Box office	$1.046 billion[3]
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides is a 2011 American fantasy swashbuckler film directed by Rob Marshall, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, and written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio. It is the fourth film in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series, following At World's End (2007) as a standalone sequel, and is loosely based on the 1987 novel On Stranger Tides by Tim Powers. Johnny Depp, Kevin R. McNally and Geoffrey Rush reprise their roles from the previous films, with Penélope Cruz and Ian McShane joining the cast. The story follows the eccentric pirate Captain Jack Sparrow on a quest for the Fountain of Youth after crossing paths with Angelica, a mysterious woman from his past, and being forced aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge, the ship of the legendary pirate Blackbeard.

On Stranger Tides was produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. During the back-to-back production of Dead Man's Chest (2006) and At World's End, writers Elliott and Rossio first learned of Powers' novel and considered it a good starting point for a new film in the series. Pre-production started after the end of the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, with Depp collaborating with the writers on the story design. Gore Verbinski did not return as director from previous films reportedly due to his commitment with Rango (2011). Principal photography lasted for 106 days between June and November 2010, with locations in Hawaii, the United Kingdom, Puerto Rico and California. Filming employed 3D cameras similar to those used in the production of the 2009 film Avatar, and ten companies were involved with the film's visual effects. Following inflated production costs which ballooned the net budget to $379 million, the film was the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release.

On Stranger Tides premiered at the Disneyland Resort on May 7, 2011, and was theatrically released in the United States on May 20. The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over $1 billion worldwide, breaking several box office records and becoming the third highest-grossing film of 2011. A fifth film, Dead Men Tell No Tales, was released in 2017.

Plot
Around 1750,[6] years after Captain Jack Sparrow acquired Sao Feng's map to find the Fountain of Youth and the Black Pearl stolen by Hector Barbossa,[N 1] a castaway found in the ocean was brought to King Ferdinand at Cádiz, holding a ship's logbook of Ponce de León, who died 200 years earlier searching for the Fountain. Meanwhile Jack rescues his first mate, Joshamee Gibbs, from execution in London, only to get captured. Gibbs takes Jack's map, while Jack himself meets King George II, who wants him to guide an expedition to locate the Fountain before the Spanish Armada, led by The Spaniard. Barbossa joins the expedition, now as a privateer wearing a peg leg and having lost the Pearl, believed to be sunk.[a] Jack escapes, leading Barbossa to later recruit Gibbs, who memorizes Jack's map before burning it, and they set sail aboard the British Navy ship HMS Providence.

Captain Teague, Jack's father, tells Sparrow that the Profane Ritual is required to use the Fountain. Jack also hears of another Jack Sparrow recruiting a crew. The impostor is Angelica, Jack's former lover and daughter of Blackbeard, who shanghais Jack into service aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge. Amongst the crew are zombie officers and Philip Swift, a captured missionary. Blackbeard practices voodoo magic as a brujo[8] and wants to find the Fountain to avoid a prophesied death by a one-legged man. Although Jack incites the human crew to mutiny against the zombies, Blackbeard subdues the mutineers with a sword that allows him to control ships. Jack learns from Angelica that the ritual for the Fountain requires a mermaid's tear and two silver chalices located on Ponce de León's ship, the Santiago. Both chalices get water from the Fountain, and the person who drinks the water with the tear gets all the years of life from the other. Angelica also shows Jack Blackbeard's collection of captured, miniaturized ships in bottles, including the Black Pearl.

The Revenge sails to Whitecap Bay, where Blackbeard's crew captures the mermaid Syrena. Barbossa, Gibbs, and some of the British crew continue on foot after the Providence is attacked by mermaids. Syrena's tail becomes legs after being out of water; seeing that she cannot walk, Philip offers to carry Syrena. After their newfound love is used to extract the mermaid's tear, Syrena is left to die. Blackbeard sends Jack to get the chalices, taking the latter's magic compass. Jack and Barbossa meet on the Santiago, but find the chalices have been taken by the Spanish. Before retrieving the chalices, Barbossa reveals his true agenda: a desire for revenge against Blackbeard, detailing the attack on the Black Pearl, which Barbossa truly believes to be sunk,[a] which led to cutting off his leg. Jack returns to Blackbeard, giving him the chalices in exchange for Jack's compass, which Jack sends off with Gibbs.

All parties locate the Fountain of Youth, which leads to a battle, in which Barbossa uses a sword he poisoned using "poisonous toads" to stab Blackbeard. Angelica cuts her hand on the poisoned blade. The Spaniard throws the chalices into a deep pool and, believing it is an abomination against God, orders his men to destroy the Fountain. In the chaos, Philip frees Syrena, who gives the chalices to Jack. Filling the chalices with the remaining drops of water from the Fountain, adding Syrena's tear, Jack tricks Blackbeard into drinking the chalice lacking the tear; this earns his and Angelica's enmity. Angelica is healed, whilst Blackbeard dies. Syrena returns to an injured Philip and, after she forgives him, they kiss and return underwater.[b]

Barbossa claims Blackbeard's ship, crew, and sword for his own, and returns to a life of piracy. Meanwhile, Jack maroons Angelica on a small island, expressing his love and mistrust. Jack reunites with Gibbs, who uses the compass to locate the Revenge and retrieve the Black Pearl in a bottle. As they figure out how to get the Pearl out, Jack tells Gibbs he's determined to continue living the pirate's life. In the post-credits scene, a voodoo doll of Jack created by Blackbeard washes ashore to Angelica, who smiles.

Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members and characters
Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow: Legendary pirate, former captain of the Black Pearl.
Penélope Cruz as Angelica: Jack's former love interest, first mate and daughter of Blackbeard. As the production date for On Stranger Tides neared, Penélope Cruz found out she was pregnant with her first child, a son with Javier Bardem. Director Rob Marshall and producer Jerry Bruckheimer worried Cruz might back out, despite Bruckheimer himself saying it didn't affect production,[9] but Cruz remained committed to the film. To accommodate her condition, the schedule was adjusted to shoot more of Cruz's scenes before she started to show. The costume designer created an elastic corset to allow the actress to move more freely, and Cruz's outfits were constantly being altered. "I just had a new fitting every three weeks," Cruz said. "We kept having fittings, but they were very, very kind to do it." Cruz did all of her close-up action scenes, though her pregnancy forced the filmmakers to use a stunt double on more of the wide shots.[10] In September 2010, after it became noticeable on set at Puerto Rico, representatives of Cruz and Bardem confirmed she was four-and-a-half months pregnant.[11] After that, Penélope only filmed Angelica's close-ups while her sister Mónica did all of Angelica's long-distance shots.[12]
Ian McShane as Blackbeard: Legendary pirate, captain of the Queen Anne's Revenge, and Angelica's father. McShane was previously considered to play Davy Jones (later portrayed by Bill Nighy) in Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest.[13]
Geoffrey Rush as Captain Hector Barbossa: Legendary pirate-turned-privateer, Jack's rival, former captain of the Black Pearl, and now captain of the HMS Providence.
Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: Jack's loyal friend, and former first mate of the Black Pearl.
Sam Claflin as Philip Swift: A missionary, kept prisoner aboard Blackbeard's ship, and Syrena's love interest.
Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey as Syrena: A mermaid captured by Blackbeard's crew, and Philip's love interest.
Stephen Graham as Scrum: A self-serving crew member of the Queen Anne's Revenge.
Richard Griffiths as King George II
Greg Ellis as Lt. Cmdr. Theodore Groves: Barbossa's second-in-command aboard the Providence. Ellis reprises his role as an officer under the command of Commodore James Norrington in The Curse of the Black Pearl and Lord Cutler Beckett in At World's End.
Óscar Jaenada as The Spaniard: King Ferdinand's most trusted agent.
Keith Richards appears as Captain Teague, legendary pirate and Jack Sparrow's father, reprising his role from At World's End. Damian O'Hare reprises his role as Lieutenant Gillette from The Curse of the Black Pearl. King George's ministers include Roger Allam as Prime Minister Henry Pelham and Anton Lesser as Lord John Carteret. Other Spanish characters include Sebastian Armesto as King Ferdinand, Juan Carlos Vellido as a Spanish captain. Judi Dench has a cameo appearance as a society lady who encounters Jack Sparrow in a carriage.

Production
Development
By September 2006, Mark Zoradi, president of the Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group was quoted as saying, "The third film... will conclude the initial Pirates trilogy, though it is unlikely to be the last Pirates sequel."[14][15] Terry Rossio said in 2007 that a fourth film was possible,[16] and producer Jerry Bruckheimer expressed interest in a spin-off.[17] Director Gore Verbinski concurred that "all of the stories set in motion by the first film have been resolved. If there ever were another Pirates of the Caribbean film, I would start fresh and focus on the further adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow."[18]

Shortly before the premiere of Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End, Bruckheimer stated it was the end of the Pirates of the Caribbean trilogy, but the idea of a spin-off was still possible.[19] After the film's successful opening weekend, Dick Cook, then Chairman of the Walt Disney Studios, said he was interested in a fourth installment. Los Angeles Times also reported that rights to a book were bought.[20] Johnny Depp was expected to reprise his role as Captain Jack Sparrow. Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio had started working on a script in 2007, but they were interrupted by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, and only resumed in mid-2008.[21]

The fourth film was first announced on September 28, 2008, during a Disney event at the Kodak Theatre with Johnny Depp and Walt Disney Studios chairman Dick Cook, with Depp in full Captain Jack Sparrow attire, while also wearing the Lone Ranger mask to announce his involvement in a Lone Ranger movie.[22][23][24] In June 2009, Bruckheimer indicated Disney would prefer the fourth installment of Pirates to be released before Lone Ranger film, which was being worked on for release in the summer of 2010. He hoped original Pirates director Gore Verbinski would return for the fourth film, as his BioShock film adaptation had been put on hold.[25] As Verbinski was unavailable due to his commitment with Rango the same year, Bruckheimer suggested Rob Marshall, whom he considered a "premiere filmmaker", stating that "Every film [Marshall] made I thought was unique and different".[26] On July 21, 2009, Marshall accepted the job, because of the "whole new story line and set of characters. It felt new, and that was important to me."[21] Marshall's involvement wasn't reported until August.[27] Marshall said the film provided him a long-awaited opportunity to work with Depp, and that his directing was helped by his experience as a choreographer—"the action sequences felt like big production numbers".[28] "I really had one criteria for signing on. And that was a story I could actually follow."[29]

On September 11, 2009, during a presentation at Disney's D23 Expo, Cook and Johnny Depp, in full Captain Jack Sparrow costume, made the announcement that a fourth Pirates film was in development for a summer 2011 release. The title was announced as Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides,[30] later revealed to have been taken from Tim Powers's 1987 novel On Stranger Tides.[26] Cook resigned in September 2009 after working for Disney for over 38 years.[31] Depp's faith in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides was somewhat shaken after the resignation, with Depp explaining that "There's a fissure, a crack in my enthusiasm at the moment. It was all born in that office".[32] Depp also explained Cook was one of the few who accepted his portrayal of Jack Sparrow: "When things went a little sideways on the first Pirates movie and others at the studio were less than enthusiastic about my interpretation of the character, Dick was there from the first moment. He trusted me".[32] Regardless, on January 6, 2010, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 20, 2011.[33]

Director Rob Marshall visited the Pirates of the Caribbean ride in Disneyland for inspiration, eventually paying homage with a skeleton holding a magnifying glass in Ponce de León's ship. Another ride reference scene featuring "Old Bill", the pirate who tries to share his rum with a cat, was also filmed but cut.[34] Pintel and Ragetti were originally supposed to make an appearance, but director Rob Marshall opted out of the idea as he feared their roles would be cut.[35]

Writing
During the production of Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest and At World's End, writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio discovered Tim Powers's 1987 novel On Stranger Tides, which they considered a good foundation on which to base "a new chapter" in the Pirates series.[26] Disney bought the rights to the novel in April 2007.[36] In 2009, after the announcement of the film's title, which led to speculation in regards to his book, Powers insisted that Jack Sparrow and his book's main character Jack Shandy "are totally different characters" but that it was possible that "they might overlap" Blackbeard and Hector Barbossa, though felt certain the Fountain of Youth was the only thing they would hold on to due to the film's ending.[37] Rossio stated that he and Elliot had considered using Blackbeard and the Fountain of Youth in the story, "but whenever you say those words, Powers's novel comes to mind. There was no way we could work in that field without going into territory Tim had explored." However, while taking inspiration from Powers' novel, Rossio denied that the film would be a straight version of the novel: "Blackbeard came from the book, and in the book, there is a daughter character, too. But Jack Sparrow is not in the book, nor is Barbossa. So I wouldn't call this an adaptation".[21] Rossio declared the script for On Stranger Tides was written to be a standalone film, "kind of a James Bond sort of thing", instead of the "designed to be a trilogy" structure of the previous installments.[38] They hoped to "design a story that would support new characters," knowing that previous arcs were over.[39] "The main guideline was to create a stand-alone story rather than a continuation of the trilogy, or the start of a new one. And then of course the Tim Powers book, 'On Stranger Tides,' was a huge inspiration for characters, theme, settings, and basic storyline."[40] Bruckheimer added that there was a decision to "streamline the story a little bit, make it a little simpler and not have as many characters to follow", as the number of characters and subplots in At World's End caused the film to have an unwieldy length.[26] The duo decided to employ another sea myth alluded to in the previous episodes: mermaids,[38] which are briefly referenced as "suck-you-byes, female demons that weirdly and erotically occupied the last hours of men marooned on barren islands" in the fourth chapter of the book. The mermaids' role expanded in the film's script, which included a vast attack sequence.[39]

Depp was deeply involved with the story design, frequently meeting the writers to show what he was interested in doing, and in the words of Rossio, being "involved in coming up with storylines, connecting characters, creating moments that we would then fashion, shape and then go back."[38] Among Depp's suggestions were turning Philip into a missionary and having a Spanish contingent following the protagonists.[40][39] Afterwards, Rob Marshall and executive producer John DeLuca met Rossio and Elliot and did alterations of their own, including building the female lead.[39]

Casting
Johnny Depp in a film premiere.
Geoffrey Rush in a festival.
Kevin McNally.
Top to bottom: Johnny Depp, Geoffrey Rush, and Kevin McNally who reprised their roles from the previous films as Captain Jack Sparrow, Captain Hector Barbossa, and Joshamee Gibbs respectively.
Depp signed on to return as Captain Jack Sparrow in September 2008, saying that he would come back if the script was good.[22] Almost a year later, it was reported that Disney announced that Depp would be paid $55.5 million for his role, realizing that without him the franchise would be "dead and buried."[41] Geoffrey Rush expressed interest in returning to his role as Hector Barbossa.[42] Bruckheimer later confirmed the presence of Rush as Barbossa,[43] and Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs.[44] Rush was positive on Barbossa having lost a leg, as he considered the disability made him "angrier, more forceful and resilient as a character", and had to work with the stunt team for an accurate portrayal of the limp and usage of crutch, particularly during sword fighting scenes.[45] While the production team considered a prop pegleg to be put over Rush's leg, the tight schedule caused it to be replaced with a blue sock that was replaced digitally, with a knob on the shoe to give Rush a reference for his walk.[12] Three other actors from the previous films returned: Greg Ellis as Lt. Theodore Groves, Damian O'Hare as Lt. Gilette,[46] and Keith Richards as Captain Teague. On reprising his cameo role from At World's End, Richards and Depp tried to persuade Mick Jagger to join Richards as a pirate elder.[47]

Previous cast members Orlando Bloom (Will Turner) and Keira Knightley (Elizabeth Swann) repeatedly stated that they would not reprise their roles, declining interest in returning to the Pirates series as they both thought the storyline involving their characters had gone as far as it could in At World's End.[48][49][50] On August 1, 2009, Bill Nighy expressed his desire to return as Davy Jones, who died in the previous film At World's End, citing a possibility to resurrect the character.[51][52] On February 5, 2010, Mackenzie Crook also stated he would not be reprising his role of Ragetti, stating, "They haven't asked me. But actually I don't mind that at all. I'm a fan of the first one especially and I think the trilogy we've made is great. I'd almost like them to leave it there."[53]

New cast members include Ian McShane, who plays the notorious pirate and primary antagonist of the film, Blackbeard, and Penélope Cruz, who plays Angelica, Jack Sparrow's love interest.[43] According to Marshall, McShane was chosen because "he can play something evil but there's always humor behind it as well" and the actor accepted the job due to both the "very funny and charming" script and the opportunity to work with Marshall.[54][40] The beard took one hour and a half to get applied, and McShane likened the character's costume to "a real biker pirate—it's all black leather."[55] Marshall said Cruz was the only actress considered for the role, as she fit the description as "an actress who could not only go toe to toe with Johnny and match him, but also needed to be all the things that Jack Sparrow is in a way. She needed to be funny and clever and smart and crafty and beautiful",[28] and invited her for the role as they wrapped the production of Nine.[12] The actress spent two months working out and learning fencing for the role.[56] Cruz was pregnant during filming, leading the costume department to redesign her wardrobe to be more elastic and the producers to hire her sister Mónica Cruz to double for Penélope in risky scenes.[12] Depp recommended Stephen Graham, who worked with him in Public Enemies, to play Scrum, a Machiavellian pirate and sidekick to Jack Sparrow,[57][58] and Richard Griffiths for the role of King George II, as Depp was a fan of Griffiths' work on Withnail and I.[12] Sam Claflin, a recent drama school graduate with television experience, was chosen to play the missionary Philip,[59] and British actor Paul Bazely also joined the cast.[60] Spanish news website El País reported that the film had four Spanish actors: Cruz, Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey, Óscar Jaenada, and Juan Carlos Vellido.[61] Jaenada was picked for both his work in The Losers and a recommendation by Cruz.[62]

Casting for mermaids required the actresses to have natural breasts—no implants. As Bruckheimer explained to EW, "I don't think they had breast augmentation in the 1700s, [...] So it's natural for casting people to say, 'We want real people.'"[63] Marshall invited Spanish-French actress Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey to play Syrena after seeing her in a French magazine article on up-and-coming actresses.[45] Bergès-Frisbey had to take lessons of English, swimming and breath control for the role.[64] The rest of the mermaid portrayers, such as Australian supermodel Gemma Ward,[65] were chosen for having "exotic sense, an otherworldly sensibility, but also under those layers a deadly quality", according to Marshall, and had to take swimming lessons to learn movements such as the dolphin and eggbeater kicks.[66]

Filming
With the new director in Rob Marshall, there was a slight change in tone from the previous films, a much keener eye on history, and a clearer idea of when it takes place. Terry Rossio considers this shift in tone to actually, including some more historical references, be very much in keeping with the franchise. According to production designer John Myhre, the filmmakers got together in a room and picked a date of 1750, "and if it was a bit earlier, or just a hair later, maybe we'd do what was most fun for the storytelling, but we're in that range, we're saying mid-1700s."[4][5]

Principal photography began on June 14, 2010, in Hawaii,[39][67] with a synopsis released.[68] Filming was moved to California in August 2010,[69] primarily at the Long Beach shore[54][40] and a recreation of Whitecap Bay done in the Universal Studios backlot,[39] as the original Hawaiian location on Halona Cove was plagued with strong tides.[45] After a brief shoot in Puerto Rico,[54][40] with locations in both Palomino Island and the Fort of San Cristóbal in San Juan,[70] production moved to the United Kingdom in September, where principal photography wrapped on November 18 after 106 days of shooting.[39] Locations included Hampton Court Palace in London,[12] Knole House in Kent,[54][40] and Old Royal Naval College at Greenwich.[71] Interiors were shot at London's Pinewood Studios, and a replica of an 18th-century London street was built on the backlot alongside the soundstages.[54][40][72] The producers also considered using New Orleans as a location.[73] In October, security was breached at the UK site when a celebrity impersonator gained access to filming at the Old Royal Naval College by dressing up as Captain Jack.[citation needed]

After the joint production of Dead Man's Chest and At World's End cost over $300 million, Disney decided to give a lower budget to the fourth installment.[74] Many costs had to be cut, including moving primary production to Hawaii and London, where tax credits are more favorable, and having a shorter shooting schedule and fewer scenes featuring special effects compared to At World's End.[75] The tighter schedule—according to Bruckheimer, "We had a 22-week post, and for a picture like this, with almost 1,200 visual effects shots, it's usually 40 weeks"—meant that Marshall supervised editing of sequences during filming.[39] The British financial statements of the film revealed total expenditures of £240.7 million ($410.6 million) by 2013, with Disney receiving a rebate of $32.1 million from the British government, making Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides the most expensive film ever made to date.[2]

Bruckheimer said the decision to film in 3D was made due to its being "immersive filmmaking; I think it makes you part of the actual filming because you're part of the screen." Bruckheimer described it as the first major "exterior movie" to be shot in 3D, as Avatar was mostly done in sound stages.[26] At first Marshall was not much interested in 3D, but the director eventually considered it a film that could benefit from the format. "You are on an adventure and with the 3D experience you are inside that adventure."[28] While the original plan was to add 3D effects during post-production, the decision was made to shoot digitally with 3D cameras. Only one sequence was shot conventionally and needed a 3D conversion.[26] The cameras were improved versions of the ones James Cameron developed for Avatar, which were made more compact for extra mobility. This meant the cameras could be brought into locations such as the Hawaiian jungle.[76]

Queen Anne's Revenge was built atop Sunset, the same ship used to depict Black Pearl in previous installments. In February 2010, Sunset was sailed from Long Beach to a shipyard in Hawaii for the reforms, where a big concern was to make it imposing, with three stories, without sacrificing actual seakeeping. According to Myhre, given Blackbeard was meant to be the meanest pirate to appear in the series, the look for Queen Anne's Revenge was ominous, with sails dyed blood red, various elements on fire, and a decoration based on skulls and bones (drawing inspiration from the Sedlec Ossuary in Czech Republic). Damage from cannon fire was also added to show that "not only Blackbeard was a dying man, but his ship is also a dying ship". The ship's figurehead also drew inspiration from Blackbeard's pirate flag.[77] The replica ship HMS Surprise was used for Barbossa's ship, HMS Providence,[78] and all the scenes aboard Providence were shot on the Long Beach shore as Surprise could not be sailed to Hawaii.[12] Over 50 designs were considered for the Fountain of Youth, with the final one representing a temple built by an ancient civilization around the Fountain, which itself was located in a round rocky structure to represent "the circle of life". The locations leading up to the Fountain were shot in the Hawaiian islands of Kauai and Oahu, but the Fountain itself was built at the 007 Stage on Pinewood.[79]

Effects
On Stranger Tides employed 1,112 shots of computer-generated imagery,[39] which were done by ten visual effects companies.[80] Cinesite visual effects supervisor Simon Stanley-Clamp claimed that the most difficult part was doing the effects in 3D: "Rotoscoping is tricky. Cleaning up plates is double the work, and tracking has to be spot on."[71] The lead companies, with over 300 effects each, were Industrial Light & Magic—responsible for, among others, the mermaids, ships in bottles and most water effects[81]—and Moving Picture Company, who created digital ships and environment extensions, such as changing weather and designing cliffs and waterfalls.[82] Filming the mermaids involved eight model-actresses, who portrayed them outside the water, as well as 22 synchronized swimming athletes and a group of stuntwomen, both of whom wore motion capture suits to be later replaced by digital mermaids. Mermaid corpses were depicted by plaster models.[54][40][66] The design tried to avoid the traditional representations of mermaids in paintings and literature, instead going for a scaly body with a translucent membrane inspired by both jellyfish and the fabric employed in ballet tutus. To make the mermaids more menacing underwater, the faces of the actresses had some digital touch-ups on the underwater scenes, adding sharper teeth and a shimmery fish scale quality on the skin.[83] ILM also handled Blackbeard's death, where Ian McShane's actual performance was covered by digital doubles which turned him into a "boiling mass of blood and clothing", and a hurricane-like formation that represented "the waters of the Fountain taking his life".[79] Cinesite handled the recreation of London and Barbossa's peg leg,[71] CIS Hollywood did 3D corrections and minor shots, and Method Studios created matte paintings.[84]

Music
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (soundtrack)
The film's score was written by Hans Zimmer, who had worked in all of the previous entries in the franchise; being the main composer for the second and third installments.[85] Zimmer said that he tried to incorporate a rock n' roll sound, as he felt "pirates were the rock 'n' rollers of many, many years ago",[86] and Spanish elements, which led to a collaboration with Mexican guitarists Rodrigo y Gabriela and a tango song written by Penélope Cruz's brother Eduardo.[87] American composer Eric Whitacre contributed several choir-based cues,[87][88] as well as regular assistant Geoff Zanelli.[85]

Marketing
Disney's marketing president, MT Carney, said that the film's advertising campaign was intended "to remind people of why they fell in love with Jack Sparrow in the first place and also introduce new elements in a way that was elegant".[39] Sony Pictures' former marketing president, Valerie Van Galder, was hired as a consultant.[89] In the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con, footage of Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow was shown as a "Comic-Con Greeting" while also telling fans what to "possibly" expect in the upcoming film.[90] The footage would later be uploaded on Jerry Bruckheimer Films's YouTube channel,[91] as well as being featured in later features and the UK trailer for the film. The first behind-the-scenes footage from the film appeared on Entertainment Tonight on December 4, 2010.[92] Three trailers were released,[39] one in December, which had a 3D version included with the release of Tron: Legacy[93] and broadcast by ESPN 3D;[94] a Super Bowl XLV spot in February 2011, which was later released online in an extended version;[95] and a final trailer in March that focused more on the plot than the previous trailer and commercials.[96]

Promotional tie-ins included Lego Pirates of the Caribbean toy sets and a related video game,[97][98] a cell phone app by Verizon Wireless,[99] a special edition of Pirate's Booty,[100] lines of nail polish by OPI,[101] clothing from Hot Topic,[102] and jewelry from Swarovski.[103] Goldline International produced replicas of the "Pieces of Eight" coins from the movies and gold Mexican Escudo coins, which were given in sweepstakes at the El Capitan Theatre.[104] At Disney California Adventure Park, the Pirates of the Caribbean segment of the World of Color show was extended to include visual clips and music from On Stranger Tides.[105]

Release
Theatrical
On a staircase with a red carpet stand both a man wearing glasses and a white jacket atop a black business suit, and a woman wearing a blue dress with transparencies.
Penélope Cruz and Johnny Depp promoting the film at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.
On January 6, 2010, Disney announced that the film would be released in the United States and Canada on May 20, 2011, following Columbia Pictures' announcement of a delay in the Spider-Man reboot and Paramount Pictures slating Thor for May 6, 2011.[33]

The world premiere of On Stranger Tides was on May 7, 2011, at a premium ticket screening at Disneyland in Anaheim, California, home of the original Pirates of the Caribbean ride that inspired the film series. Many of the film's stars were in attendance. Two other early screenings followed, one in Moscow on May 11,[106] and another during the Cannes International Film Festival on May 14.[107] The international release dates fell within May 18 and 20, with opening dates in the United Kingdom on May 18, in Australia on May 19, and in North America on May 20.[108][109][110][111] The film was released on a then-record 402 IMAX screens, 257 screens in North America, and 139 in other territories.[112] The total number of theaters was 4,155 in North America and 18,210 worldwide.[113][114] For the film's release in the United States, On Stranger Tides received a PG-13 rating by the Motion Picture Association of America for "intense sequences of action/adventure violence, some frightening images, sensuality and innuendo"; marking it the first Walt Disney Pictures film to be rated PG-13 for sexual content.[115]

Home media
The film was distributed by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 12, 2011, in the UK, topping both the Blu-ray and DVD sales charts during its first two weeks. The film had its high-definition home release on October 18, 2011, in the United States and Canada. Three different physical packages were made available: a 2-disc combo pack (Blu-ray and DVD), a 5-disc combo pack (2-disc Blu-ray, 1-disc Blu-ray 3D, 1-disc DVD, and 1-disc Digital Copy), and a 15-disc collection featuring all four Pirates movies. On Stranger Tides was also released as a movie download in both high definition and 3D.[116][117][118] The regular DVD edition was released on December 6.[119]

In its first week of release, it sold 1.71 million Blu-ray units and generated $48.50 million, topping the weekly Blu-ray chart. However these results were quite skewed due to the one-month delay of its DVD-only release.[120] It sold 3.20 million Blu-ray units ($83.46 million) after 11 weeks.[121] It has also sold 1.12 million DVD units ($19.32 million).[122] Upon its television premiere on December 29, 2013, in the UK on BBC One, it was watched by a total of 5.4 million viewers, making it the third-most watched program that night, according to overnight figures.[123]

Reception
Box office
On Stranger Tides earned $241.1 million in North America and $804.6 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $1.045 billion.[124] It is the third-highest-grossing film of 2011 and the second most successful installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[125][126] On its worldwide opening weekend, it grossed $350.6 million, surpassing At World's End's $344 million opening as best in the series and ranking as the seventh-highest worldwide opening.[127] It scored an IMAX worldwide opening-weekend record with $16.7 million[128] (first surpassed by Transformers: Dark of the Moon).[129]

It set records for the least time to reach $500, $600, and $700 million worldwide (in 10, 12 and 16 days, respectively).[130][131][132] The first of these records was first surpassed by Dark of the Moon[133] and the other two by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2.[134] After 46 days in theaters (July 2, 2011), it became the eighth film in cinema history and the fourth film released by Walt Disney Studios to cross the $1-billion-mark.[135] It set a record for the fastest Disney-distributed film to reach the milestone (first surpassed by Marvel's The Avengers)[136] and it is the fifth-fastest film overall to achieve this.[137]

North America
During its Thursday-midnight showings, On Stranger Tides earned $4.7 million from 2,210 theaters,[138] and $34.9 million in total on its opening day.[139] It earned $90.2 million on its opening weekend, topping the weekend box office, but earning much less than its two immediate predecessors (At World's End – $114.7 million and Dead Man's Chest – $135.6 million) and the directly preceding Johnny Depp spectacle (Alice in Wonderland – $116.1 million).[140] 3D showings accounted for only 46% of its opening-weekend gross.[141] It closed on September 29, 2011, with a $241.1 million gross, ranking as the fifth-highest-grossing film of 2011[142] and the least profitable film of the franchise.[143] However, it was the top-grossing movie during May 2011 (with $166.8 million by May 31).[144]

Outside North America
Outside North America, On Stranger Tides is the sixth-highest-grossing film,[145] the third-highest-grossing Disney film,[146] the third-highest-grossing 2011 film and the highest-grossing film of the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[147] It is the highest-grossing Pirates film in at least 58 territories.[135]

During its opening day (Wednesday, May 18, 2011), On Stranger Tides made $18.5 million from 10 territories.[148] It added 37 territories and $25.7 million on Thursday, for a two-day total of $44.2 million,[149] and on Friday, it expanded to almost all countries, earning $46.2 million for a three-day total of $92.1 million.[150] On its five-day opening weekend as a whole, it earned a then-record $260.4 million from 18,210 screens in more than 100 territories, in all which it reached first place at the box office.[151] The record debut was surpassed later in the same summer season by Deathly Hallows Part 2.[152] Earnings originating from 3-D showings accounted for 66% of the weekend gross, which was a much greater share than in North America.[141] Its highest-grossing countries during its first weekend were Russia and the CIS ($31.42 million including previews),[153] China ($22.3 million)[154] and Germany ($20.53 million).[155][156] It dominated for three weekends at the overseas box office despite competition from The Hangover Part II, Kung Fu Panda 2, and X-Men: First Class.[157][158] It reached the $300, $400 and $500-million-mark at the box office outside North America in record time (7, 11 and 14 days respectively), records first surpassed by Deathly Hallows – Part 2.[135][159][160]

On Stranger Tides set opening day records in both Russia (including the CIS) and Sweden.[148] Subsequently, it set opening-weekend records in Latin America, the Middle East, Russia, Norway, Ukraine and Turkey,[114] still retaining the record in Russia ($26.8 million)[161] and Ukraine ($2.15 million).[162] Its highest-grossing market after North America is Japan ($108.9 million), followed by China ($71.8 million)[163] and Russia and the CIS ($63.7 million).[164] It is the highest-grossing film of 2011 in Russia and the CIS,[165] Austria,[166] Ukraine,[167] Greece,[168] Portugal and Angola,[169] South Africa,[170] Romania,[171] Bulgaria,[172] Egypt,[173] Estonia,[174] and Latvia.[164][175]

Critical response
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 32% of 275 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5/10. The website's consensus reads: "It's shorter and leaner than the previous sequel, but this Pirates runs aground on a disjointed plot and a non-stop barrage of noisy action sequences."[176] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 45 out of 100, based on 39 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.[177] CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was a "B+" on an A+ to F scale.[113]

Roger Ebert gave On Stranger Tides two out of four stars, saying that although the removal of Knightley and Bloom as well as the addition of Cruz were positive aspects, the film in general was "too much of a muchness" for him.[178] Tom Long of The Detroit News gave a D+, saying that Jack Sparrow had "worn out his welcome". Despite the more linear plot, "the movie is still ridiculous". He found On Stranger Tides to be "precisely what you'd expect of the fourth installment of a movie based on an amusement park ride: a whole lot of noise, plenty of stunts and complete silliness."[179] British film critic Mark Kermode gave the film an overwhelmingly negative review on his BBC Radio 5 Live show, saying "it's not as staggeringly misjudged as the third part, because it is just nothing, it is just a big empty nothing, whereas part three I think was an active atrocity, it's just nothing at all".[180]

As with the previous films, the plot was criticized as incoherent and confusing. The Arizona Republic critic Bill Goodykoontz rated the film two out of five, stating that "the movie is a series of distractions tossed together in the hopes that they will come together in a coherent story. That never really happens."[181] Online reviewer James Berardinelli considered the script "little more than a clothesline from which to dangle all of the obligatory set pieces",[182] and USA Today's Claudia Puig found On Stranger Tides "familiar and predictable...often incoherent and crammed with pointless details."[183]

Mike Scott from The Times-Picayune mentions that "while this latest chapter isn't quite sharp enough to restore the sense of discovery that made that first outing so darn exciting, it's enough to make up for most of the missteps that made the third one so darn arrgh-inducing."[184] Writing for The A.V. Club, Tasha Robinson described On Stranger Tides as "a smaller film than past installments, by design and necessity", and felt that "the series has needed this streamlining" as the film "feels lightweight, but that's still better than bloated."[185]

On Stranger Tides also had positive reviews; some critics found the film to be entertaining and well-made. Richard Roeper gave the film a B+, describing it as "the most fun installment since the first", calling the story "pure cartoon, but a lot easier to follow than the other sequels", and summing as "the franchise is getting tired, but Penelope energizes it."[186] Along the same lines, Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film three out of four stars, writing that it "feels as fresh and bracingly exhilarating as the day Jack Sparrow first swashed his buckle, infusing new reckless energy into a franchise that shows no signs of furling its sails". She said that Marshall "swiftly and without fuss delivers the action set pieces and eye-popping escapism" and praised Depp, Cruz, and McShane's performances.[187] Ray Bennett from The Hollywood Reporter considered that Marshall "shows terrific flair with all the usual chases and sword fights, and he handles the 3D well", and welcomed Penélope Cruz's character, saying she "brings her Oscar-winning vivacity" and had "lively sexual tension" with Depp.[188] Writing for The Globe and Mail, Rick Groen found the action scenes to range from "merely competent to tritely cluttered", but he was pleased with the overall result, calling McShane a "fresh villain" whose "stentorian tones are welcome anywhere".[189] Variety's Andrew Barker considered the film derivative, but accessible. "It has nary an original idea and still doesn't make much sense, but it's lost all pretensions that it should". He praised Geoffrey Rush, stating that he "not only gets the funniest lines and reaction shots, but also starts to siphon away much of the roguish charm that used to be Depp's stock and trade."[187]

Accolades
See also: List of accolades received by the Pirates of the Caribbean film series
The film was nominated for four Teen Choice Awards: Sci-Fi/Fantasy Movie, Sci-Fi/Fantasy Actor, Sci-Fi/Fantasy Actress, and Villain.[190] Its trailer and TV spot were nominated for Golden Trailer Awards.[191] The film won Best Movie for Mature Audiences Award at the 2012 Movieguide Awards.[192]

Sequel
Further information: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
Shortly before the release of On Stranger Tides in 2011, the cast and crew of the fourth film were told to set aside time in the near future, because Walt Disney Pictures intended to shoot a fifth and sixth film back-to-back with Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow.[193] However, it was later stated that only a fifth film was in the works, with Terry Rossio writing the initial script without his partner Ted Elliott,[194] and Rob Marshall rumoured to return to direct.[195] Rossio's draft was a proposed story written with the studio and producer guideline that Keira Knightley and Orlando Bloom would not return to the series as Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann. Pintel and Ragetti return from the Gore Verbinski's Pirates trilogy, among other characters, and there was also some connective tissue references to On Stranger Tides, notably Philip Swift and Syrena.[7] However, Rossio's script was discarded in 2012, and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain, a sea witch named the Sea Widow, which made Johnny Depp "worried that would be redundant to Dark Shadows, which also featured a female villain."[196]

In 2013, Jeff Nathanson was hired to write a new script for the film, featuring the Trident of Poseidon loosely based on Rossio's Trident of Neptune,[7] which would be directed by Kon-Tiki directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg.[197][198] The film would be titled Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales, a stand-alone sequel which had Depp, Rush, McNally, Graham reprising their roles from On Stranger Tides, among other characters from the series, with Bloom and Knightley appearing in cameo roles.[7][199][200] It was released in May 2017.[201]

Notes
 As depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007). In addition to the 1750 setting of On Stranger Tides,[4][5] Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017) takes place roughly 21 years after At World's End as well as in the year 1751.
 Screenwriter Terry Rossio released his unproduced screenplay for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017), which includes additional information in extensive footnotes.[7] Pertaining to On Stranger Tides, Rossio notes that Barbossa does not know about the Black Pearl in a bottle in the fourth film, though Barbossa later shows knowledge in the fifth film.
 Both Philip and Syrena return in Terry Rossio's unproduced screenplay for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017),[7] though both characters do not appear in the final version of the film.
References
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". British Board of Film Classification. May 5, 2011. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2015.
 Sylt, Christian (July 22, 2014). "Fourth Pirates Of The Caribbean Is Most Expensive Movie Ever With Costs Of $410 Million". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 7, 2014. Production costs: $410.6 million; rebate: $32.1 million
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2011.
 Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Set Visit! - ComingSoon.net - Part 1 - Archived
 Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Set Visit! - ComingSoon.net - Part 2 - Archived
 According to production designer John Myhre, the filmmakers of On Stranger Tides picked the date of 1750, or in the range of the mid-1700s.[4][5]
 PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES by Terry Rossio - Wordplayer.com
 Rossio, Terry (March 26, 2013). "SCRIPTS Message Board: Critical analysis], posted by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 Johnny Depp And Penelope Cruz Have 'Great Chemistry,' Says 'Pirates' Producer - MTV
 'Pirates Of The Caribbean': Penelope Cruz Talks Johnny Depp, Pregnancy (VIDEO) - HuffPost Entertainment
 Penélope Cruz Is 4½-Months Pregnant - PEOPLE - Archived
 Rob Marshall, John DeLuca. Audio commentary for Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-Ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment.
 "'Pirates 2' DVD Unlocks Davy Jones". Chicago Tribune. December 4, 2006.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Going Beyond Three Movies?". ComingSoon.net. September 19, 2006.
 "'Pirates 3' will end trilogy but not sequel". sawfnews.com. September 17, 2006. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 "Exclusive interview: Terry Rossio". Moviehole. February 12, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2007.
 "Bruckheimer talks Pirates spin-off". Moviehole. May 10, 2007. Archived from the original on May 12, 2007.
 "Gore Verbinski on the Future of Pirates of the Caribbean". MovieWeb. November 30, 2007. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 Mitchell, Peter (May 10, 2007). "The pirates' treasure". Herald Sun. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Friedman, Josh (May 29, 2007). "4th 'Pirates' film already on horizon". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Graser, Marc (September 24, 2008). "Disney, Depp return to 'Caribbean'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved September 25, 2008.
 Disney, Depp return to 'Caribbean' | Variety
 In Disney Future with Johnny Depp - ComingSoon.net
 Douglas, Edward (June 11, 2009). "Bruckheimer gives updates on Pirates & The Lone Ranger". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2009.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Producer Jerry Bruckheimer On Set Interview". Collider. Archived from the original on April 11, 2011. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Michael Fleming (August 2, 2009). "Rob Marshall circles 'Pirates'". Variety. Retrieved August 3, 2009.
 Kilday, Gregg (May 13, 2011). "Cannes Q&A: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Director Rob Marshall". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Barnes, Brooks (May 11, 2011). "New Captain for a Series Becalmed". The New York Times.
 Boucher, Geoff (September 11, 2009). "Johnny Depp (in Jack Sparrow costume) surprises Disney D23 Expo audience". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Chmielewski, Dawn C.; Eller, Claudia; Fritz, Ben (September 19, 2009). "Walt Disney Studios chief Dick Cook abruptly leaves the company". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2009.
 Eller, Claudia (September 18, 2009). "Johnny Depp says he's 'shocked and very sad' about Dick Cook's departure". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 DiOrio, Carl (January 6, 2010). "'Spider-Man 4' release date squeezed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Deleted/Extended Scenes. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Wordplayer.com: WORDPLAY/Archives/"We Sail With the Tide" by Terry Rossio". October 12, 2010. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Boucher, Geoff (October 6, 2009). "Surprised author Tim Powers finds himself setting sail with 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 The Latest On Pirates 4 Origins | Movies - Empire
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Screenwriter Terry Rossio On Set Interview: Pirates of the Caribbean 4: On Stranger Tides". Collider. Archived from the original on November 26, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. p. 2. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 POTC4 Presskit
 "PIRATES NO 4 NETS £33M FOR JOHNNY". The Daily Express. November 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2009.
 Ditzian, Eric (September 23, 2009). "Geoffrey Rush Says He's Planning To Shoot 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' In The Spring". MTV.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Ditzian, Eric (March 19, 2010). "Exclusive: Penelope Cruz To Play Johnny Depp's Love Interest In New 'Pirates'". MTV Movie News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Movie Interview – Bruckheimer on Pirates of the Caribbean 4". IGN. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on July 4, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Legends of On Stranger Tides. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Damian O'Hare". Hamilton Hodell Talent Management. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 "Johnny Depp Wants Another Rolling Stone to Join Pirates of the Caribbean". The Daily Express. April 10, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Three Pirates enough for Keira". The Independent. March 22, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Wigler, Josh (January 26, 2010). "Orlando Bloom Won't Return For 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: On Stranger Tides'". MTV.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 20, 2010). "Johnny Depp Provides Updates on Dark Shadows, The Tourist and Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Collider.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Bill Nighy Eager to Sail Again for 'Pirates of the Caribbean 4'". MTV. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 "Is Pirates of the Caribbean 4 in trouble? | Blastr". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 Jones, Alice (February 5, 2010). "Mackenzie Crook: More than just the Office boy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on December 24, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides production notes" (PDF). Walt Disney Pictures. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Ian McShane talks Pirates 4". Total Film. April 11, 2011. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2012.
 "La armada invencible española viaja a 'Piratas del Caribe 4'". El País (in Spanish). June 29, 2010. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2010.
 McNary, Dave (June 3, 2010). "Graham sails with 'Pirates 4' crew". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Shennan, Paddy. "This is England star Stephen Graham on why he's celebrating Halloween in Liverpool this year" Archived January 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Liverpool Echo (October 22, 2010). Retrieved 2011-03-15.
 "Sam Claflin Added to Cast of Walt Disney Pictures'/Jerry Bruckheimer Films' Epic Adventure Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" (Press release). Walt Disney Pictures. April 16, 2010. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Savvas, George (May 25, 2010). "New 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Cast Members Find Inspiration at Disneyland Park". Walt Disney Parks and Resorts. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved September 3, 2010.
 Rull, Carles (June 30, 2010). "Cuatro españoles en 'Piratas del Caribe 4". 20 minutos. Multiprensa & Mas S.L. Archived from the original on November 6, 2010. Retrieved January 27, 2011.
 "Óscar Jaenada, a punto de ser un 'pirata del Caribe'". El Periódico de Catalunya (in Spanish). June 10, 2011. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2012.
 Collis, Clark (January 26, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides': Jerry Bruckheimer explains why you need real breasts to play a mermaid". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 15, 2011. Retrieved January 27, 2011.
 Singer, Leigh (May 17, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Astrid Berges-Frisbey Interview". IGN. Archived from the original on August 20, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2011.
 JMO and Elle (June 13, 2010). "Pirate tale for Gemma Ward". The Sunday Telegraph. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Under the Scene: Bringing Mermaids to Life. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 Bruckheimer, Jerry (June 14, 2010). "Announcement of initial shooting". Twitter. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 The Walt Disney Company and Affiliated Companies - Corporate Information - Archived
 "Disney open casting calls for 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' in Los Angeles". Disney Feature Film Casting. July 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Verrier, Richard (March 9, 2011). "Puerto Rico boosts tax incentives for bigger Hollywood role". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 Kaufman, Debra (June 29, 2011). "Behind the Lens: A look at VFX in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Creative COW Magazine. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "New Pirates of the Caribbean epic to film". Pinewood Studios Group. August 2, 2010. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved August 26, 2010.
 Scott, Mike (June 10, 2010). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' spokesman lets the wind out of the sails of New Orleans fans". The Times-Picayune. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Stewart, Andrew (May 19, 2011). "Fourth try aims to stir high 'Tides' at B.O." Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 Eller, Claudia; Chmielewski, Dawn C. (May 3, 2010). "Not even Bruckheimer movies can escape budget cuts". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Giardina, Carolyn (May 22, 2011). "The New 3D Technology Behind 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Last Sail/First Voyage. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 Singer, Michael (2011). The Art of Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4231-3946-1.
 In Search of the Fountain. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Cinefex. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Desowitz, Bill (May 24, 2011). "A Splash of Mermaids for Fourth 'Pirates'". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Failes, Ian (June 14, 2011). "MPC's pirates & their ships sail on Stranger Tides". fxguide. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Houston, Kimberly (September 16, 2011). "INTERVIEW: PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN VFX Art Director Aaron McBride on Creating the Film's Mermaids". The Daily BLAM!. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011.
 Desowitz, Bill (May 26, 2011). "CIS Hollywood and Method Studios Discuss On Stranger Tides". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films' "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" Soundtrack Sets Sail With Oscar®-Winning Composer Hans Zimmer at the Helm With Acclaimed Guitar Duo Rodrigo y Gabriela" (Press release). Walt Disney Records. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides: Hans Zimmer Interview". MovieWeb. May 5, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Schweiger, Daniel (May 6, 2011). "Audio: On The Score With Hans Zimmer". Film Music Magazine. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2011.
 Whitacre, Eric. "Pirates IV! – Blog" Archived September 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. (January 25, 2011) EricWhitacre.com Retrieved 2011-03-15.
 Masters, Kim (September 8, 2010). "Disney hires new marketing guru for "Pirates 4"". The Hollywood Reporter. Reuters. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Check out the 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Comic Con Teaser". July 24, 2010.
 "OFFICIAL Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Jack Sparrow Comic-Con 2010 Greeting". YouTube. July 29, 2010.
 Raup, Jordan (December 5, 2010). "First Footage From 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides'". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved December 5, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean Teaser Trailer with TRON: Legacy" Archived October 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ComingSoon.net. Retrieved March 15, 2011.
 Goetzel, David (December 15, 2010). "ESPN Airs 3D Ads, Movie Trailers". Media Post. Archived from the original on December 17, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Lichtig, Max (February 6, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Super Bowl Spot". Collider. Archived from the original on September 2, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 McWeeny, Drew (March 21, 2011). "Disney spills even more story details in new 'Pirates 4' trailer and stills". HitFix. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2010.
 "LEGO Group and Disney Consumer Products Announce Building Sets Inspired by Pirates of the Caribbean Films" (Press release). The LEGO Group. November 18, 2010. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 East, Thomas (April 5, 2011). "Pirates Of The Caribbean is 'perfect foundation' for a LEGO game". Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Verizon Wireless Delivers Official Mobile App For Walt Disney Pictures And Jerry Bruckheimer Films' Pirates Of The Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Verizon Wireless. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
 "Pirate's Booty Collaborates with Disney's "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides"" (Press release). Pirate Brands. May 2, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Discover a Treasure Trove of Color with New BRIGHTS by OPI, Inspired by Disney and Jerry Bruckheimer Film's Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Walt Disney Corporation. Archived from the original on January 10, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Disney and Hot Topic Present Treasure-Filled "Pirates Day" Fan Events to Celebrate Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films' "Pirates of the Caribbean: on Stranger Tides"" (Press release). Walt Disney Pictures. May 9, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Swarovski – Swarovski's Collaboration with Disney Continues with "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" Collection". Swarovski. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2010.
 "Goldline Coin Giveaway". Goldline International. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved April 28, 2011.
 Guy, Timothy (June 9, 2011). "Disney's magic undergoes changes". The Press-Enterprise. Archived from the original on November 20, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
 Graser, Marc (April 27, 2011). "'Pirates' set for first Russian bow". Variety. Archived from the original on December 23, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 13, 2011). "Johnny Depp's 'Pirates 4' headed for Cannes Film Festival". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". IGN. Archived from the original on March 17, 2011. Retrieved April 25, 2011.
 Lesnick, Silas (July 22, 2010). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Teaser Shown Read more: UPDATE: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Teaser Shown". Coming Soon. Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". OK Magazine Australia. January 25, 2011. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 25, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides An IMAX 3D Experience". IMAX. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Vlessing, Etan (May 17, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: on Stranger Tides' to Be Released on a Record 402 Imax Screens". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved May 18, 2011.
 Young, John (May 22, 2011). "Box office report: 'Pirates of the Caribbean' posts year's best opening with $90.1 mil". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 Segers, Frank (May 22, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Pirates' Makes $260.4 Million Overseas, Largest Offshore Debut Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2011.
 Blum, Matt (May 20, 2011). "9 Things Parents (and Everyone Else) Should Know About Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Wired. Retrieved May 12, 2020.
 "Exclusive Clip: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Mermaid Magic". Entertainment Tonight. July 13, 2011. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 Smith, Matthew (July 14, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D". Blu-Ray.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 McCutcheon, David (July 14, 2011). "Pirates' Stranger Tides Revealed". Blu-Ray.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 Grabert, Jessica (July 15, 2011). "Disney Will Delay Pirates Of The Caribbean DVD For A Month After Blu-Ray". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 "Blu-ray Sales: Strange Week on the Home Market". November 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2011.
 "Weekly Domestic Blu-ray Sales Chart for Week Ending January 1, 2012". Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides – DVD Sales". Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides thrills 5.4m on BBC One". Digital Spy. December 30, 2013. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
 "2011 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2023.
 "WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 "WORLDWIDE OPENINGS". Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 22, 2011). "Box Office Report: Disney's 'Pirates' $346 million Opening Fourth Biggest Worldwide Debut Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (July 3, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Transformers: Dark of the Moon' Scores Third-Best Global Bow Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 27, 2011). "Friday Box Office: 'Hangover 2' No. 1 With $30 Mil". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2011.
 Brandon, Gray (May 29, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Booty Grows, 'Hangover,' 'Panda' Sequels Open Strongly". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 3, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Sails Past $700 Mil Mark". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved June 4, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 8, 2011). "'Transformers' Blowing Up Worldwide Records". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 26, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Potter' Still Magic Overseas". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 ""Pirates" treasure mounts to $1 billion worldwide". Reuters. July 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 Corliss, Richard (May 13, 2012). "The Avengers Storms the Billion Dollar Club—in Just 19 Days". Time. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2012.
 "'Transformers' Becomes Tenth Billion-Dollar Movie Ever; 'Potter' Hits Another Worldwide Milestone". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
 "Forecast: 'Pirates' Has Some Life Left in It". Box Office Mojo. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (May 23, 2011). "Weekend Report: 'Pirates' Rides Smaller 'Tides'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
 Young, John. "'Pirates of the Caribbean': Why didn't more American moviegoers opt to see Jack Sparrow in 3-D?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "2011 DOMESTIC GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2011.
 "May Posts Record Gross". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2011.
 "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 15, 2011). "Box Office Shocker: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Is Disney's Top Film of All Time Overseas". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2011.
 "2011 Overseas Total Yearly Box Office Results". Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Segers, Frank (May 19, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Earns $18.5 Million Internationally". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 20, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Opens to $4.7 Million at Midnight Showings". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 18, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 "'Pirates' Already Making Waves Overseas". Box Office Mojo. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 "PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: ON STRANGER TIDES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
 "OVERSEAS TOTAL ALL TIME OPENINGS". Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Russia – CIS Box Office May 19–22, 2011". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". EntGroup. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014.
 "Germany Box Office May 19–22, 2011". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 14, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Pirates' Sails to New Overseas Record". Box Office Mojo. May 22, 2011. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 Brandon, Gray (May 31, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Booty Grows, 'Hangover,' 'Panda' Sequels Open Strongly". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (June 5, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Out-Class 'X-Men'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 26, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Potter' Still Magic Overseas". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 25, 2011). "Disney's 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Hits $400 Million Worldwide in Less Than a Week". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 "RUSSIA – CIS ALL TIME OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2011.
 "UKRAINE ALL TIME OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (December 30, 2011). "Box Office Report: Christian Bale's 'Flowers of War' Already Top-Grossing Chinese Film of 2011". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011) – International Box Office Results". Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Russia – CIS Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Austria Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Ukraine Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Greece Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Portugal and Angola Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "South Africa (Entire Region) Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Romania Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Bulgaria Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Egypt Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Estonia Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Latvia Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2021.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2011.
 Ebert, Roger. "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 12, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Long, Tom. "Review: Fourth 'Pirates' movie makes little sense but a lot of noise". The Detroit News. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 "Mark Kermode savages new Pirates Of The Caribbean film". BBC. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on August 21, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2011.
 Goodykoontz, Bill (May 18, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides,' 2 stars". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Berardinelli, James (May 19, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Reelviews. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Puig, Claudia (May 19, 2011). "'Pirates: On Stranger Tides' in precarious position". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Scott, Mike (May 20, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". The Times-Picayune. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Robinson, Tasha (May 19, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Roeper, Richard. "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". ReelzChannel. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Barker, Andrew (May 12, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Bennett, Ray (May 10, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides: Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Groen, Rick (May 20, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean 4: Ahoy me hearties, there's treasure amid the bloat". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on August 22, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Garvey, Marianne (June 29, 2011). "Teen Choice Awards Nominees Announced". E! Online. Archived from the original on July 2, 2011. Retrieved June 29, 2011.
 "The 12th Annual Golden Trailer Awards® Posts Nominations for Best Movie Promos of 2011: Live Gala Award Show Will be Held June 29 at the Music Box Theatre in L.A." Golden Trailer Awards.com. June 3, 2011. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
 "2012 Movieguide Awards Winners". Movieguide Awards. February 1, 2012. Retrieved June 29, 2017.
 McWeeny, Drew (December 4, 2010). "Disney will set sail for 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 5 & 6 back-to-back". HitFix.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 14, 2011). "Disney Sets Terry Rossio To Script Fifth 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Installment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Is Being Rewritten; Rob Marshall May Direct". Screen Rant. January 11, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016.
 Rossio, Terry (August 7, 2016). "Wordplay/Columns/55. "Time Risk" by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 Fleming, Mike. "'Kon-Tiki' Helmers Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg Land 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 Title Revealed!". August 23, 2013. Archived from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Alexander, Bryan. "'Pirates of the Caribbean' uprising: How the fans demanded Keira Knightley". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021.
 Nugent, John (June 1, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean 5: Ten Revelations From Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". Empire. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
 Brzeski, Patrick (April 25, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' to World Premiere at Shanghai Disneyland". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.
	Film portal
flag	United States portal
icon	Speculative fiction portal
icon	Fantasy portal
icon	Oceans portal
icon	2010s portal
icon	Disney portal
Official website
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at IMDb
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Box Office Mojo
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Rotten Tomatoes
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Metacritic Edit this at Wikidata
On Stranger Tides title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
Czech Republic
Categories: 2011 films2011 action films2010s action adventure films2010s fantasy adventure films2011 3D filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican fantasy action filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAmerican films about revengeAmerican sequel filmsAmerican zombie films2010s fantasy action filmsFilms about mermaidsFilms based on American novelsFilms based on multiple worksFilms directed by Rob MarshallFilms produced by Jerry BruckheimerFilms scored by Hans ZimmerFilms set in LondonFilms set in SpainFilms set in 1750Films set in the 18th centuryFilms set on shipsFilms shot at Bovingdon StudiosFilms shot at Pinewood StudiosFilms shot in CaliforniaFilms shot in HawaiiFilms shot in Puerto RicoFilms with screenplays by Ted ElliottFilms with screenplays by Terry RossioIMAX filmsPirates of the Caribbean (film series) filmsFilms about treasure huntingFilms about legendary creaturesWalt Disney Pictures filmsJerry Bruckheimer Films filmsFilms about Voodoo2010s English-language films2010s American filmsCultural depictions of George II of Great BritainCultural depictions of BlackbeardEnglish-language action adventure filmsEnglish-language fantasy action filmsEnglish-language fantasy adventure films
This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 10:23 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

63 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Writing
Casting
Filming
Effects
Music
Marketing
Release

Theatrical
Home media
Reception

Box office
North America
Outside North America
Critical response
Accolades
Sequel
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Pirates 4" redirects here. For the 3D short film, see Pirates 4-D. For the soundtrack, see Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (soundtrack).
Pirates of the Caribbean:
On Stranger Tides
The film's main character Jack Sparrow stands on a beach. He wears a red bandana, a dark blue vest, white shirt, and black pants. Attached to his belt are two guns and a scarf. A ship with flaming sails approaches from the sea. In the background, three mermaids sit on a rock. The main actors' names are at the top, and the film credits at the bottom.
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Rob Marshall
Written by	
Ted Elliott
Terry Rossio
Based on	
Characters
by Ted Elliott
    Terry Rossio
    Stuart Beattie
    Jay Wolpert
Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
On Stranger Tides
by Tim Powers
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	
Johnny Depp
Penélope Cruz
Ian McShane
Kevin R. McNally
Geoffrey Rush
Cinematography	Dariusz Wolski
Edited by	
David Brenner
Wyatt Smith
Music by	Hans Zimmer
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Walt Disney Studios
Motion Pictures
Release dates	
May 7, 2011 (Disneyland Resort)
May 20, 2011 (United States)
Running time	137 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	
$410.6 million (gross)
$378.5 million (net)[2]
Box office	$1.046 billion[3]
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides is a 2011 American fantasy swashbuckler film directed by Rob Marshall, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, and written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio. It is the fourth film in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series, following At World's End (2007) as a standalone sequel, and is loosely based on the 1987 novel On Stranger Tides by Tim Powers. Johnny Depp, Kevin R. McNally and Geoffrey Rush reprise their roles from the previous films, with Penélope Cruz and Ian McShane joining the cast. The story follows the eccentric pirate Captain Jack Sparrow on a quest for the Fountain of Youth after crossing paths with Angelica, a mysterious woman from his past, and being forced aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge, the ship of the legendary pirate Blackbeard.

On Stranger Tides was produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films, and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. During the back-to-back production of Dead Man's Chest (2006) and At World's End, writers Elliott and Rossio first learned of Powers' novel and considered it a good starting point for a new film in the series. Pre-production started after the end of the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, with Depp collaborating with the writers on the story design. Gore Verbinski did not return as director from previous films reportedly due to his commitment with Rango (2011). Principal photography lasted for 106 days between June and November 2010, with locations in Hawaii, the United Kingdom, Puerto Rico and California. Filming employed 3D cameras similar to those used in the production of the 2009 film Avatar, and ten companies were involved with the film's visual effects. Following inflated production costs which ballooned the net budget to $379 million, the film was the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release.

On Stranger Tides premiered at the Disneyland Resort on May 7, 2011, and was theatrically released in the United States on May 20. The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed over $1 billion worldwide, breaking several box office records and becoming the third highest-grossing film of 2011. A fifth film, Dead Men Tell No Tales, was released in 2017.

Plot
Around 1750,[6] years after Captain Jack Sparrow acquired Sao Feng's map to find the Fountain of Youth and the Black Pearl stolen by Hector Barbossa,[N 1] a castaway found in the ocean was brought to King Ferdinand at Cádiz, holding a ship's logbook of Ponce de León, who died 200 years earlier searching for the Fountain. Meanwhile Jack rescues his first mate, Joshamee Gibbs, from execution in London, only to get captured. Gibbs takes Jack's map, while Jack himself meets King George II, who wants him to guide an expedition to locate the Fountain before the Spanish Armada, led by The Spaniard. Barbossa joins the expedition, now as a privateer wearing a peg leg and having lost the Pearl, believed to be sunk.[a] Jack escapes, leading Barbossa to later recruit Gibbs, who memorizes Jack's map before burning it, and they set sail aboard the British Navy ship HMS Providence.

Captain Teague, Jack's father, tells Sparrow that the Profane Ritual is required to use the Fountain. Jack also hears of another Jack Sparrow recruiting a crew. The impostor is Angelica, Jack's former lover and daughter of Blackbeard, who shanghais Jack into service aboard the Queen Anne's Revenge. Amongst the crew are zombie officers and Philip Swift, a captured missionary. Blackbeard practices voodoo magic as a brujo[8] and wants to find the Fountain to avoid a prophesied death by a one-legged man. Although Jack incites the human crew to mutiny against the zombies, Blackbeard subdues the mutineers with a sword that allows him to control ships. Jack learns from Angelica that the ritual for the Fountain requires a mermaid's tear and two silver chalices located on Ponce de León's ship, the Santiago. Both chalices get water from the Fountain, and the person who drinks the water with the tear gets all the years of life from the other. Angelica also shows Jack Blackbeard's collection of captured, miniaturized ships in bottles, including the Black Pearl.

The Revenge sails to Whitecap Bay, where Blackbeard's crew captures the mermaid Syrena. Barbossa, Gibbs, and some of the British crew continue on foot after the Providence is attacked by mermaids. Syrena's tail becomes legs after being out of water; seeing that she cannot walk, Philip offers to carry Syrena. After their newfound love is used to extract the mermaid's tear, Syrena is left to die. Blackbeard sends Jack to get the chalices, taking the latter's magic compass. Jack and Barbossa meet on the Santiago, but find the chalices have been taken by the Spanish. Before retrieving the chalices, Barbossa reveals his true agenda: a desire for revenge against Blackbeard, detailing the attack on the Black Pearl, which Barbossa truly believes to be sunk,[a] which led to cutting off his leg. Jack returns to Blackbeard, giving him the chalices in exchange for Jack's compass, which Jack sends off with Gibbs.

All parties locate the Fountain of Youth, which leads to a battle, in which Barbossa uses a sword he poisoned using "poisonous toads" to stab Blackbeard. Angelica cuts her hand on the poisoned blade. The Spaniard throws the chalices into a deep pool and, believing it is an abomination against God, orders his men to destroy the Fountain. In the chaos, Philip frees Syrena, who gives the chalices to Jack. Filling the chalices with the remaining drops of water from the Fountain, adding Syrena's tear, Jack tricks Blackbeard into drinking the chalice lacking the tear; this earns his and Angelica's enmity. Angelica is healed, whilst Blackbeard dies. Syrena returns to an injured Philip and, after she forgives him, they kiss and return underwater.[b]

Barbossa claims Blackbeard's ship, crew, and sword for his own, and returns to a life of piracy. Meanwhile, Jack maroons Angelica on a small island, expressing his love and mistrust. Jack reunites with Gibbs, who uses the compass to locate the Revenge and retrieve the Black Pearl in a bottle. As they figure out how to get the Pearl out, Jack tells Gibbs he's determined to continue living the pirate's life. In the post-credits scene, a voodoo doll of Jack created by Blackbeard washes ashore to Angelica, who smiles.

Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members and characters
Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow: Legendary pirate, former captain of the Black Pearl.
Penélope Cruz as Angelica: Jack's former love interest, first mate and daughter of Blackbeard. As the production date for On Stranger Tides neared, Penélope Cruz found out she was pregnant with her first child, a son with Javier Bardem. Director Rob Marshall and producer Jerry Bruckheimer worried Cruz might back out, despite Bruckheimer himself saying it didn't affect production,[9] but Cruz remained committed to the film. To accommodate her condition, the schedule was adjusted to shoot more of Cruz's scenes before she started to show. The costume designer created an elastic corset to allow the actress to move more freely, and Cruz's outfits were constantly being altered. "I just had a new fitting every three weeks," Cruz said. "We kept having fittings, but they were very, very kind to do it." Cruz did all of her close-up action scenes, though her pregnancy forced the filmmakers to use a stunt double on more of the wide shots.[10] In September 2010, after it became noticeable on set at Puerto Rico, representatives of Cruz and Bardem confirmed she was four-and-a-half months pregnant.[11] After that, Penélope only filmed Angelica's close-ups while her sister Mónica did all of Angelica's long-distance shots.[12]
Ian McShane as Blackbeard: Legendary pirate, captain of the Queen Anne's Revenge, and Angelica's father. McShane was previously considered to play Davy Jones (later portrayed by Bill Nighy) in Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest.[13]
Geoffrey Rush as Captain Hector Barbossa: Legendary pirate-turned-privateer, Jack's rival, former captain of the Black Pearl, and now captain of the HMS Providence.
Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: Jack's loyal friend, and former first mate of the Black Pearl.
Sam Claflin as Philip Swift: A missionary, kept prisoner aboard Blackbeard's ship, and Syrena's love interest.
Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey as Syrena: A mermaid captured by Blackbeard's crew, and Philip's love interest.
Stephen Graham as Scrum: A self-serving crew member of the Queen Anne's Revenge.
Richard Griffiths as King George II
Greg Ellis as Lt. Cmdr. Theodore Groves: Barbossa's second-in-command aboard the Providence. Ellis reprises his role as an officer under the command of Commodore James Norrington in The Curse of the Black Pearl and Lord Cutler Beckett in At World's End.
Óscar Jaenada as The Spaniard: King Ferdinand's most trusted agent.
Keith Richards appears as Captain Teague, legendary pirate and Jack Sparrow's father, reprising his role from At World's End. Damian O'Hare reprises his role as Lieutenant Gillette from The Curse of the Black Pearl. King George's ministers include Roger Allam as Prime Minister Henry Pelham and Anton Lesser as Lord John Carteret. Other Spanish characters include Sebastian Armesto as King Ferdinand, Juan Carlos Vellido as a Spanish captain. Judi Dench has a cameo appearance as a society lady who encounters Jack Sparrow in a carriage.

Production
Development
By September 2006, Mark Zoradi, president of the Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group was quoted as saying, "The third film... will conclude the initial Pirates trilogy, though it is unlikely to be the last Pirates sequel."[14][15] Terry Rossio said in 2007 that a fourth film was possible,[16] and producer Jerry Bruckheimer expressed interest in a spin-off.[17] Director Gore Verbinski concurred that "all of the stories set in motion by the first film have been resolved. If there ever were another Pirates of the Caribbean film, I would start fresh and focus on the further adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow."[18]

Shortly before the premiere of Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End, Bruckheimer stated it was the end of the Pirates of the Caribbean trilogy, but the idea of a spin-off was still possible.[19] After the film's successful opening weekend, Dick Cook, then Chairman of the Walt Disney Studios, said he was interested in a fourth installment. Los Angeles Times also reported that rights to a book were bought.[20] Johnny Depp was expected to reprise his role as Captain Jack Sparrow. Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio had started working on a script in 2007, but they were interrupted by the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, and only resumed in mid-2008.[21]

The fourth film was first announced on September 28, 2008, during a Disney event at the Kodak Theatre with Johnny Depp and Walt Disney Studios chairman Dick Cook, with Depp in full Captain Jack Sparrow attire, while also wearing the Lone Ranger mask to announce his involvement in a Lone Ranger movie.[22][23][24] In June 2009, Bruckheimer indicated Disney would prefer the fourth installment of Pirates to be released before Lone Ranger film, which was being worked on for release in the summer of 2010. He hoped original Pirates director Gore Verbinski would return for the fourth film, as his BioShock film adaptation had been put on hold.[25] As Verbinski was unavailable due to his commitment with Rango the same year, Bruckheimer suggested Rob Marshall, whom he considered a "premiere filmmaker", stating that "Every film [Marshall] made I thought was unique and different".[26] On July 21, 2009, Marshall accepted the job, because of the "whole new story line and set of characters. It felt new, and that was important to me."[21] Marshall's involvement wasn't reported until August.[27] Marshall said the film provided him a long-awaited opportunity to work with Depp, and that his directing was helped by his experience as a choreographer—"the action sequences felt like big production numbers".[28] "I really had one criteria for signing on. And that was a story I could actually follow."[29]

On September 11, 2009, during a presentation at Disney's D23 Expo, Cook and Johnny Depp, in full Captain Jack Sparrow costume, made the announcement that a fourth Pirates film was in development for a summer 2011 release. The title was announced as Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides,[30] later revealed to have been taken from Tim Powers's 1987 novel On Stranger Tides.[26] Cook resigned in September 2009 after working for Disney for over 38 years.[31] Depp's faith in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides was somewhat shaken after the resignation, with Depp explaining that "There's a fissure, a crack in my enthusiasm at the moment. It was all born in that office".[32] Depp also explained Cook was one of the few who accepted his portrayal of Jack Sparrow: "When things went a little sideways on the first Pirates movie and others at the studio were less than enthusiastic about my interpretation of the character, Dick was there from the first moment. He trusted me".[32] Regardless, on January 6, 2010, Disney announced that the film would be released on May 20, 2011.[33]

Director Rob Marshall visited the Pirates of the Caribbean ride in Disneyland for inspiration, eventually paying homage with a skeleton holding a magnifying glass in Ponce de León's ship. Another ride reference scene featuring "Old Bill", the pirate who tries to share his rum with a cat, was also filmed but cut.[34] Pintel and Ragetti were originally supposed to make an appearance, but director Rob Marshall opted out of the idea as he feared their roles would be cut.[35]

Writing
During the production of Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest and At World's End, writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio discovered Tim Powers's 1987 novel On Stranger Tides, which they considered a good foundation on which to base "a new chapter" in the Pirates series.[26] Disney bought the rights to the novel in April 2007.[36] In 2009, after the announcement of the film's title, which led to speculation in regards to his book, Powers insisted that Jack Sparrow and his book's main character Jack Shandy "are totally different characters" but that it was possible that "they might overlap" Blackbeard and Hector Barbossa, though felt certain the Fountain of Youth was the only thing they would hold on to due to the film's ending.[37] Rossio stated that he and Elliot had considered using Blackbeard and the Fountain of Youth in the story, "but whenever you say those words, Powers's novel comes to mind. There was no way we could work in that field without going into territory Tim had explored." However, while taking inspiration from Powers' novel, Rossio denied that the film would be a straight version of the novel: "Blackbeard came from the book, and in the book, there is a daughter character, too. But Jack Sparrow is not in the book, nor is Barbossa. So I wouldn't call this an adaptation".[21] Rossio declared the script for On Stranger Tides was written to be a standalone film, "kind of a James Bond sort of thing", instead of the "designed to be a trilogy" structure of the previous installments.[38] They hoped to "design a story that would support new characters," knowing that previous arcs were over.[39] "The main guideline was to create a stand-alone story rather than a continuation of the trilogy, or the start of a new one. And then of course the Tim Powers book, 'On Stranger Tides,' was a huge inspiration for characters, theme, settings, and basic storyline."[40] Bruckheimer added that there was a decision to "streamline the story a little bit, make it a little simpler and not have as many characters to follow", as the number of characters and subplots in At World's End caused the film to have an unwieldy length.[26] The duo decided to employ another sea myth alluded to in the previous episodes: mermaids,[38] which are briefly referenced as "suck-you-byes, female demons that weirdly and erotically occupied the last hours of men marooned on barren islands" in the fourth chapter of the book. The mermaids' role expanded in the film's script, which included a vast attack sequence.[39]

Depp was deeply involved with the story design, frequently meeting the writers to show what he was interested in doing, and in the words of Rossio, being "involved in coming up with storylines, connecting characters, creating moments that we would then fashion, shape and then go back."[38] Among Depp's suggestions were turning Philip into a missionary and having a Spanish contingent following the protagonists.[40][39] Afterwards, Rob Marshall and executive producer John DeLuca met Rossio and Elliot and did alterations of their own, including building the female lead.[39]

Casting
Johnny Depp in a film premiere.
Geoffrey Rush in a festival.
Kevin McNally.
Top to bottom: Johnny Depp, Geoffrey Rush, and Kevin McNally who reprised their roles from the previous films as Captain Jack Sparrow, Captain Hector Barbossa, and Joshamee Gibbs respectively.
Depp signed on to return as Captain Jack Sparrow in September 2008, saying that he would come back if the script was good.[22] Almost a year later, it was reported that Disney announced that Depp would be paid $55.5 million for his role, realizing that without him the franchise would be "dead and buried."[41] Geoffrey Rush expressed interest in returning to his role as Hector Barbossa.[42] Bruckheimer later confirmed the presence of Rush as Barbossa,[43] and Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs.[44] Rush was positive on Barbossa having lost a leg, as he considered the disability made him "angrier, more forceful and resilient as a character", and had to work with the stunt team for an accurate portrayal of the limp and usage of crutch, particularly during sword fighting scenes.[45] While the production team considered a prop pegleg to be put over Rush's leg, the tight schedule caused it to be replaced with a blue sock that was replaced digitally, with a knob on the shoe to give Rush a reference for his walk.[12] Three other actors from the previous films returned: Greg Ellis as Lt. Theodore Groves, Damian O'Hare as Lt. Gilette,[46] and Keith Richards as Captain Teague. On reprising his cameo role from At World's End, Richards and Depp tried to persuade Mick Jagger to join Richards as a pirate elder.[47]

Previous cast members Orlando Bloom (Will Turner) and Keira Knightley (Elizabeth Swann) repeatedly stated that they would not reprise their roles, declining interest in returning to the Pirates series as they both thought the storyline involving their characters had gone as far as it could in At World's End.[48][49][50] On August 1, 2009, Bill Nighy expressed his desire to return as Davy Jones, who died in the previous film At World's End, citing a possibility to resurrect the character.[51][52] On February 5, 2010, Mackenzie Crook also stated he would not be reprising his role of Ragetti, stating, "They haven't asked me. But actually I don't mind that at all. I'm a fan of the first one especially and I think the trilogy we've made is great. I'd almost like them to leave it there."[53]

New cast members include Ian McShane, who plays the notorious pirate and primary antagonist of the film, Blackbeard, and Penélope Cruz, who plays Angelica, Jack Sparrow's love interest.[43] According to Marshall, McShane was chosen because "he can play something evil but there's always humor behind it as well" and the actor accepted the job due to both the "very funny and charming" script and the opportunity to work with Marshall.[54][40] The beard took one hour and a half to get applied, and McShane likened the character's costume to "a real biker pirate—it's all black leather."[55] Marshall said Cruz was the only actress considered for the role, as she fit the description as "an actress who could not only go toe to toe with Johnny and match him, but also needed to be all the things that Jack Sparrow is in a way. She needed to be funny and clever and smart and crafty and beautiful",[28] and invited her for the role as they wrapped the production of Nine.[12] The actress spent two months working out and learning fencing for the role.[56] Cruz was pregnant during filming, leading the costume department to redesign her wardrobe to be more elastic and the producers to hire her sister Mónica Cruz to double for Penélope in risky scenes.[12] Depp recommended Stephen Graham, who worked with him in Public Enemies, to play Scrum, a Machiavellian pirate and sidekick to Jack Sparrow,[57][58] and Richard Griffiths for the role of King George II, as Depp was a fan of Griffiths' work on Withnail and I.[12] Sam Claflin, a recent drama school graduate with television experience, was chosen to play the missionary Philip,[59] and British actor Paul Bazely also joined the cast.[60] Spanish news website El País reported that the film had four Spanish actors: Cruz, Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey, Óscar Jaenada, and Juan Carlos Vellido.[61] Jaenada was picked for both his work in The Losers and a recommendation by Cruz.[62]

Casting for mermaids required the actresses to have natural breasts—no implants. As Bruckheimer explained to EW, "I don't think they had breast augmentation in the 1700s, [...] So it's natural for casting people to say, 'We want real people.'"[63] Marshall invited Spanish-French actress Àstrid Bergès-Frisbey to play Syrena after seeing her in a French magazine article on up-and-coming actresses.[45] Bergès-Frisbey had to take lessons of English, swimming and breath control for the role.[64] The rest of the mermaid portrayers, such as Australian supermodel Gemma Ward,[65] were chosen for having "exotic sense, an otherworldly sensibility, but also under those layers a deadly quality", according to Marshall, and had to take swimming lessons to learn movements such as the dolphin and eggbeater kicks.[66]

Filming
With the new director in Rob Marshall, there was a slight change in tone from the previous films, a much keener eye on history, and a clearer idea of when it takes place. Terry Rossio considers this shift in tone to actually, including some more historical references, be very much in keeping with the franchise. According to production designer John Myhre, the filmmakers got together in a room and picked a date of 1750, "and if it was a bit earlier, or just a hair later, maybe we'd do what was most fun for the storytelling, but we're in that range, we're saying mid-1700s."[4][5]

Principal photography began on June 14, 2010, in Hawaii,[39][67] with a synopsis released.[68] Filming was moved to California in August 2010,[69] primarily at the Long Beach shore[54][40] and a recreation of Whitecap Bay done in the Universal Studios backlot,[39] as the original Hawaiian location on Halona Cove was plagued with strong tides.[45] After a brief shoot in Puerto Rico,[54][40] with locations in both Palomino Island and the Fort of San Cristóbal in San Juan,[70] production moved to the United Kingdom in September, where principal photography wrapped on November 18 after 106 days of shooting.[39] Locations included Hampton Court Palace in London,[12] Knole House in Kent,[54][40] and Old Royal Naval College at Greenwich.[71] Interiors were shot at London's Pinewood Studios, and a replica of an 18th-century London street was built on the backlot alongside the soundstages.[54][40][72] The producers also considered using New Orleans as a location.[73] In October, security was breached at the UK site when a celebrity impersonator gained access to filming at the Old Royal Naval College by dressing up as Captain Jack.[citation needed]

After the joint production of Dead Man's Chest and At World's End cost over $300 million, Disney decided to give a lower budget to the fourth installment.[74] Many costs had to be cut, including moving primary production to Hawaii and London, where tax credits are more favorable, and having a shorter shooting schedule and fewer scenes featuring special effects compared to At World's End.[75] The tighter schedule—according to Bruckheimer, "We had a 22-week post, and for a picture like this, with almost 1,200 visual effects shots, it's usually 40 weeks"—meant that Marshall supervised editing of sequences during filming.[39] The British financial statements of the film revealed total expenditures of £240.7 million ($410.6 million) by 2013, with Disney receiving a rebate of $32.1 million from the British government, making Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides the most expensive film ever made to date.[2]

Bruckheimer said the decision to film in 3D was made due to its being "immersive filmmaking; I think it makes you part of the actual filming because you're part of the screen." Bruckheimer described it as the first major "exterior movie" to be shot in 3D, as Avatar was mostly done in sound stages.[26] At first Marshall was not much interested in 3D, but the director eventually considered it a film that could benefit from the format. "You are on an adventure and with the 3D experience you are inside that adventure."[28] While the original plan was to add 3D effects during post-production, the decision was made to shoot digitally with 3D cameras. Only one sequence was shot conventionally and needed a 3D conversion.[26] The cameras were improved versions of the ones James Cameron developed for Avatar, which were made more compact for extra mobility. This meant the cameras could be brought into locations such as the Hawaiian jungle.[76]

Queen Anne's Revenge was built atop Sunset, the same ship used to depict Black Pearl in previous installments. In February 2010, Sunset was sailed from Long Beach to a shipyard in Hawaii for the reforms, where a big concern was to make it imposing, with three stories, without sacrificing actual seakeeping. According to Myhre, given Blackbeard was meant to be the meanest pirate to appear in the series, the look for Queen Anne's Revenge was ominous, with sails dyed blood red, various elements on fire, and a decoration based on skulls and bones (drawing inspiration from the Sedlec Ossuary in Czech Republic). Damage from cannon fire was also added to show that "not only Blackbeard was a dying man, but his ship is also a dying ship". The ship's figurehead also drew inspiration from Blackbeard's pirate flag.[77] The replica ship HMS Surprise was used for Barbossa's ship, HMS Providence,[78] and all the scenes aboard Providence were shot on the Long Beach shore as Surprise could not be sailed to Hawaii.[12] Over 50 designs were considered for the Fountain of Youth, with the final one representing a temple built by an ancient civilization around the Fountain, which itself was located in a round rocky structure to represent "the circle of life". The locations leading up to the Fountain were shot in the Hawaiian islands of Kauai and Oahu, but the Fountain itself was built at the 007 Stage on Pinewood.[79]

Effects
On Stranger Tides employed 1,112 shots of computer-generated imagery,[39] which were done by ten visual effects companies.[80] Cinesite visual effects supervisor Simon Stanley-Clamp claimed that the most difficult part was doing the effects in 3D: "Rotoscoping is tricky. Cleaning up plates is double the work, and tracking has to be spot on."[71] The lead companies, with over 300 effects each, were Industrial Light & Magic—responsible for, among others, the mermaids, ships in bottles and most water effects[81]—and Moving Picture Company, who created digital ships and environment extensions, such as changing weather and designing cliffs and waterfalls.[82] Filming the mermaids involved eight model-actresses, who portrayed them outside the water, as well as 22 synchronized swimming athletes and a group of stuntwomen, both of whom wore motion capture suits to be later replaced by digital mermaids. Mermaid corpses were depicted by plaster models.[54][40][66] The design tried to avoid the traditional representations of mermaids in paintings and literature, instead going for a scaly body with a translucent membrane inspired by both jellyfish and the fabric employed in ballet tutus. To make the mermaids more menacing underwater, the faces of the actresses had some digital touch-ups on the underwater scenes, adding sharper teeth and a shimmery fish scale quality on the skin.[83] ILM also handled Blackbeard's death, where Ian McShane's actual performance was covered by digital doubles which turned him into a "boiling mass of blood and clothing", and a hurricane-like formation that represented "the waters of the Fountain taking his life".[79] Cinesite handled the recreation of London and Barbossa's peg leg,[71] CIS Hollywood did 3D corrections and minor shots, and Method Studios created matte paintings.[84]

Music
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (soundtrack)
The film's score was written by Hans Zimmer, who had worked in all of the previous entries in the franchise; being the main composer for the second and third installments.[85] Zimmer said that he tried to incorporate a rock n' roll sound, as he felt "pirates were the rock 'n' rollers of many, many years ago",[86] and Spanish elements, which led to a collaboration with Mexican guitarists Rodrigo y Gabriela and a tango song written by Penélope Cruz's brother Eduardo.[87] American composer Eric Whitacre contributed several choir-based cues,[87][88] as well as regular assistant Geoff Zanelli.[85]

Marketing
Disney's marketing president, MT Carney, said that the film's advertising campaign was intended "to remind people of why they fell in love with Jack Sparrow in the first place and also introduce new elements in a way that was elegant".[39] Sony Pictures' former marketing president, Valerie Van Galder, was hired as a consultant.[89] In the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con, footage of Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow was shown as a "Comic-Con Greeting" while also telling fans what to "possibly" expect in the upcoming film.[90] The footage would later be uploaded on Jerry Bruckheimer Films's YouTube channel,[91] as well as being featured in later features and the UK trailer for the film. The first behind-the-scenes footage from the film appeared on Entertainment Tonight on December 4, 2010.[92] Three trailers were released,[39] one in December, which had a 3D version included with the release of Tron: Legacy[93] and broadcast by ESPN 3D;[94] a Super Bowl XLV spot in February 2011, which was later released online in an extended version;[95] and a final trailer in March that focused more on the plot than the previous trailer and commercials.[96]

Promotional tie-ins included Lego Pirates of the Caribbean toy sets and a related video game,[97][98] a cell phone app by Verizon Wireless,[99] a special edition of Pirate's Booty,[100] lines of nail polish by OPI,[101] clothing from Hot Topic,[102] and jewelry from Swarovski.[103] Goldline International produced replicas of the "Pieces of Eight" coins from the movies and gold Mexican Escudo coins, which were given in sweepstakes at the El Capitan Theatre.[104] At Disney California Adventure Park, the Pirates of the Caribbean segment of the World of Color show was extended to include visual clips and music from On Stranger Tides.[105]

Release
Theatrical
On a staircase with a red carpet stand both a man wearing glasses and a white jacket atop a black business suit, and a woman wearing a blue dress with transparencies.
Penélope Cruz and Johnny Depp promoting the film at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.
On January 6, 2010, Disney announced that the film would be released in the United States and Canada on May 20, 2011, following Columbia Pictures' announcement of a delay in the Spider-Man reboot and Paramount Pictures slating Thor for May 6, 2011.[33]

The world premiere of On Stranger Tides was on May 7, 2011, at a premium ticket screening at Disneyland in Anaheim, California, home of the original Pirates of the Caribbean ride that inspired the film series. Many of the film's stars were in attendance. Two other early screenings followed, one in Moscow on May 11,[106] and another during the Cannes International Film Festival on May 14.[107] The international release dates fell within May 18 and 20, with opening dates in the United Kingdom on May 18, in Australia on May 19, and in North America on May 20.[108][109][110][111] The film was released on a then-record 402 IMAX screens, 257 screens in North America, and 139 in other territories.[112] The total number of theaters was 4,155 in North America and 18,210 worldwide.[113][114] For the film's release in the United States, On Stranger Tides received a PG-13 rating by the Motion Picture Association of America for "intense sequences of action/adventure violence, some frightening images, sensuality and innuendo"; marking it the first Walt Disney Pictures film to be rated PG-13 for sexual content.[115]

Home media
The film was distributed by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on September 12, 2011, in the UK, topping both the Blu-ray and DVD sales charts during its first two weeks. The film had its high-definition home release on October 18, 2011, in the United States and Canada. Three different physical packages were made available: a 2-disc combo pack (Blu-ray and DVD), a 5-disc combo pack (2-disc Blu-ray, 1-disc Blu-ray 3D, 1-disc DVD, and 1-disc Digital Copy), and a 15-disc collection featuring all four Pirates movies. On Stranger Tides was also released as a movie download in both high definition and 3D.[116][117][118] The regular DVD edition was released on December 6.[119]

In its first week of release, it sold 1.71 million Blu-ray units and generated $48.50 million, topping the weekly Blu-ray chart. However these results were quite skewed due to the one-month delay of its DVD-only release.[120] It sold 3.20 million Blu-ray units ($83.46 million) after 11 weeks.[121] It has also sold 1.12 million DVD units ($19.32 million).[122] Upon its television premiere on December 29, 2013, in the UK on BBC One, it was watched by a total of 5.4 million viewers, making it the third-most watched program that night, according to overnight figures.[123]

Reception
Box office
On Stranger Tides earned $241.1 million in North America and $804.6 million in other countries for a worldwide total of $1.045 billion.[124] It is the third-highest-grossing film of 2011 and the second most successful installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[125][126] On its worldwide opening weekend, it grossed $350.6 million, surpassing At World's End's $344 million opening as best in the series and ranking as the seventh-highest worldwide opening.[127] It scored an IMAX worldwide opening-weekend record with $16.7 million[128] (first surpassed by Transformers: Dark of the Moon).[129]

It set records for the least time to reach $500, $600, and $700 million worldwide (in 10, 12 and 16 days, respectively).[130][131][132] The first of these records was first surpassed by Dark of the Moon[133] and the other two by Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2.[134] After 46 days in theaters (July 2, 2011), it became the eighth film in cinema history and the fourth film released by Walt Disney Studios to cross the $1-billion-mark.[135] It set a record for the fastest Disney-distributed film to reach the milestone (first surpassed by Marvel's The Avengers)[136] and it is the fifth-fastest film overall to achieve this.[137]

North America
During its Thursday-midnight showings, On Stranger Tides earned $4.7 million from 2,210 theaters,[138] and $34.9 million in total on its opening day.[139] It earned $90.2 million on its opening weekend, topping the weekend box office, but earning much less than its two immediate predecessors (At World's End – $114.7 million and Dead Man's Chest – $135.6 million) and the directly preceding Johnny Depp spectacle (Alice in Wonderland – $116.1 million).[140] 3D showings accounted for only 46% of its opening-weekend gross.[141] It closed on September 29, 2011, with a $241.1 million gross, ranking as the fifth-highest-grossing film of 2011[142] and the least profitable film of the franchise.[143] However, it was the top-grossing movie during May 2011 (with $166.8 million by May 31).[144]

Outside North America
Outside North America, On Stranger Tides is the sixth-highest-grossing film,[145] the third-highest-grossing Disney film,[146] the third-highest-grossing 2011 film and the highest-grossing film of the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[147] It is the highest-grossing Pirates film in at least 58 territories.[135]

During its opening day (Wednesday, May 18, 2011), On Stranger Tides made $18.5 million from 10 territories.[148] It added 37 territories and $25.7 million on Thursday, for a two-day total of $44.2 million,[149] and on Friday, it expanded to almost all countries, earning $46.2 million for a three-day total of $92.1 million.[150] On its five-day opening weekend as a whole, it earned a then-record $260.4 million from 18,210 screens in more than 100 territories, in all which it reached first place at the box office.[151] The record debut was surpassed later in the same summer season by Deathly Hallows Part 2.[152] Earnings originating from 3-D showings accounted for 66% of the weekend gross, which was a much greater share than in North America.[141] Its highest-grossing countries during its first weekend were Russia and the CIS ($31.42 million including previews),[153] China ($22.3 million)[154] and Germany ($20.53 million).[155][156] It dominated for three weekends at the overseas box office despite competition from The Hangover Part II, Kung Fu Panda 2, and X-Men: First Class.[157][158] It reached the $300, $400 and $500-million-mark at the box office outside North America in record time (7, 11 and 14 days respectively), records first surpassed by Deathly Hallows – Part 2.[135][159][160]

On Stranger Tides set opening day records in both Russia (including the CIS) and Sweden.[148] Subsequently, it set opening-weekend records in Latin America, the Middle East, Russia, Norway, Ukraine and Turkey,[114] still retaining the record in Russia ($26.8 million)[161] and Ukraine ($2.15 million).[162] Its highest-grossing market after North America is Japan ($108.9 million), followed by China ($71.8 million)[163] and Russia and the CIS ($63.7 million).[164] It is the highest-grossing film of 2011 in Russia and the CIS,[165] Austria,[166] Ukraine,[167] Greece,[168] Portugal and Angola,[169] South Africa,[170] Romania,[171] Bulgaria,[172] Egypt,[173] Estonia,[174] and Latvia.[164][175]

Critical response
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 32% of 275 critics' reviews are positive, with an average rating of 5/10. The website's consensus reads: "It's shorter and leaner than the previous sequel, but this Pirates runs aground on a disjointed plot and a non-stop barrage of noisy action sequences."[176] Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 45 out of 100, based on 39 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.[177] CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade moviegoers gave the film was a "B+" on an A+ to F scale.[113]

Roger Ebert gave On Stranger Tides two out of four stars, saying that although the removal of Knightley and Bloom as well as the addition of Cruz were positive aspects, the film in general was "too much of a muchness" for him.[178] Tom Long of The Detroit News gave a D+, saying that Jack Sparrow had "worn out his welcome". Despite the more linear plot, "the movie is still ridiculous". He found On Stranger Tides to be "precisely what you'd expect of the fourth installment of a movie based on an amusement park ride: a whole lot of noise, plenty of stunts and complete silliness."[179] British film critic Mark Kermode gave the film an overwhelmingly negative review on his BBC Radio 5 Live show, saying "it's not as staggeringly misjudged as the third part, because it is just nothing, it is just a big empty nothing, whereas part three I think was an active atrocity, it's just nothing at all".[180]

As with the previous films, the plot was criticized as incoherent and confusing. The Arizona Republic critic Bill Goodykoontz rated the film two out of five, stating that "the movie is a series of distractions tossed together in the hopes that they will come together in a coherent story. That never really happens."[181] Online reviewer James Berardinelli considered the script "little more than a clothesline from which to dangle all of the obligatory set pieces",[182] and USA Today's Claudia Puig found On Stranger Tides "familiar and predictable...often incoherent and crammed with pointless details."[183]

Mike Scott from The Times-Picayune mentions that "while this latest chapter isn't quite sharp enough to restore the sense of discovery that made that first outing so darn exciting, it's enough to make up for most of the missteps that made the third one so darn arrgh-inducing."[184] Writing for The A.V. Club, Tasha Robinson described On Stranger Tides as "a smaller film than past installments, by design and necessity", and felt that "the series has needed this streamlining" as the film "feels lightweight, but that's still better than bloated."[185]

On Stranger Tides also had positive reviews; some critics found the film to be entertaining and well-made. Richard Roeper gave the film a B+, describing it as "the most fun installment since the first", calling the story "pure cartoon, but a lot easier to follow than the other sequels", and summing as "the franchise is getting tired, but Penelope energizes it."[186] Along the same lines, Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post gave the film three out of four stars, writing that it "feels as fresh and bracingly exhilarating as the day Jack Sparrow first swashed his buckle, infusing new reckless energy into a franchise that shows no signs of furling its sails". She said that Marshall "swiftly and without fuss delivers the action set pieces and eye-popping escapism" and praised Depp, Cruz, and McShane's performances.[187] Ray Bennett from The Hollywood Reporter considered that Marshall "shows terrific flair with all the usual chases and sword fights, and he handles the 3D well", and welcomed Penélope Cruz's character, saying she "brings her Oscar-winning vivacity" and had "lively sexual tension" with Depp.[188] Writing for The Globe and Mail, Rick Groen found the action scenes to range from "merely competent to tritely cluttered", but he was pleased with the overall result, calling McShane a "fresh villain" whose "stentorian tones are welcome anywhere".[189] Variety's Andrew Barker considered the film derivative, but accessible. "It has nary an original idea and still doesn't make much sense, but it's lost all pretensions that it should". He praised Geoffrey Rush, stating that he "not only gets the funniest lines and reaction shots, but also starts to siphon away much of the roguish charm that used to be Depp's stock and trade."[187]

Accolades
See also: List of accolades received by the Pirates of the Caribbean film series
The film was nominated for four Teen Choice Awards: Sci-Fi/Fantasy Movie, Sci-Fi/Fantasy Actor, Sci-Fi/Fantasy Actress, and Villain.[190] Its trailer and TV spot were nominated for Golden Trailer Awards.[191] The film won Best Movie for Mature Audiences Award at the 2012 Movieguide Awards.[192]

Sequel
Further information: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales
Shortly before the release of On Stranger Tides in 2011, the cast and crew of the fourth film were told to set aside time in the near future, because Walt Disney Pictures intended to shoot a fifth and sixth film back-to-back with Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow.[193] However, it was later stated that only a fifth film was in the works, with Terry Rossio writing the initial script without his partner Ted Elliott,[194] and Rob Marshall rumoured to return to direct.[195] Rossio's draft was a proposed story written with the studio and producer guideline that Keira Knightley and Orlando Bloom would not return to the series as Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann. Pintel and Ragetti return from the Gore Verbinski's Pirates trilogy, among other characters, and there was also some connective tissue references to On Stranger Tides, notably Philip Swift and Syrena.[7] However, Rossio's script was discarded in 2012, and the writer stated that a major reason was its use of a female villain, a sea witch named the Sea Widow, which made Johnny Depp "worried that would be redundant to Dark Shadows, which also featured a female villain."[196]

In 2013, Jeff Nathanson was hired to write a new script for the film, featuring the Trident of Poseidon loosely based on Rossio's Trident of Neptune,[7] which would be directed by Kon-Tiki directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg.[197][198] The film would be titled Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales, a stand-alone sequel which had Depp, Rush, McNally, Graham reprising their roles from On Stranger Tides, among other characters from the series, with Bloom and Knightley appearing in cameo roles.[7][199][200] It was released in May 2017.[201]

Notes
 As depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007). In addition to the 1750 setting of On Stranger Tides,[4][5] Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017) takes place roughly 21 years after At World's End as well as in the year 1751.
 Screenwriter Terry Rossio released his unproduced screenplay for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017), which includes additional information in extensive footnotes.[7] Pertaining to On Stranger Tides, Rossio notes that Barbossa does not know about the Black Pearl in a bottle in the fourth film, though Barbossa later shows knowledge in the fifth film.
 Both Philip and Syrena return in Terry Rossio's unproduced screenplay for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017),[7] though both characters do not appear in the final version of the film.
References
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". British Board of Film Classification. May 5, 2011. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2015.
 Sylt, Christian (July 22, 2014). "Fourth Pirates Of The Caribbean Is Most Expensive Movie Ever With Costs Of $410 Million". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 8, 2014. Retrieved December 7, 2014. Production costs: $410.6 million; rebate: $32.1 million
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved August 22, 2011.
 Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Set Visit! - ComingSoon.net - Part 1 - Archived
 Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Set Visit! - ComingSoon.net - Part 2 - Archived
 According to production designer John Myhre, the filmmakers of On Stranger Tides picked the date of 1750, or in the range of the mid-1700s.[4][5]
 PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: DEAD MEN TELL NO TALES by Terry Rossio - Wordplayer.com
 Rossio, Terry (March 26, 2013). "SCRIPTS Message Board: Critical analysis], posted by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 Johnny Depp And Penelope Cruz Have 'Great Chemistry,' Says 'Pirates' Producer - MTV
 'Pirates Of The Caribbean': Penelope Cruz Talks Johnny Depp, Pregnancy (VIDEO) - HuffPost Entertainment
 Penélope Cruz Is 4½-Months Pregnant - PEOPLE - Archived
 Rob Marshall, John DeLuca. Audio commentary for Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-Ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment.
 "'Pirates 2' DVD Unlocks Davy Jones". Chicago Tribune. December 4, 2006.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Going Beyond Three Movies?". ComingSoon.net. September 19, 2006.
 "'Pirates 3' will end trilogy but not sequel". sawfnews.com. September 17, 2006. Archived from the original on November 2, 2006. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 "Exclusive interview: Terry Rossio". Moviehole. February 12, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved February 12, 2007.
 "Bruckheimer talks Pirates spin-off". Moviehole. May 10, 2007. Archived from the original on May 12, 2007.
 "Gore Verbinski on the Future of Pirates of the Caribbean". MovieWeb. November 30, 2007. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 Mitchell, Peter (May 10, 2007). "The pirates' treasure". Herald Sun. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Friedman, Josh (May 29, 2007). "4th 'Pirates' film already on horizon". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2010.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Graser, Marc (September 24, 2008). "Disney, Depp return to 'Caribbean'". Variety. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved September 25, 2008.
 Disney, Depp return to 'Caribbean' | Variety
 In Disney Future with Johnny Depp - ComingSoon.net
 Douglas, Edward (June 11, 2009). "Bruckheimer gives updates on Pirates & The Lone Ranger". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2009.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Producer Jerry Bruckheimer On Set Interview". Collider. Archived from the original on April 11, 2011. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Michael Fleming (August 2, 2009). "Rob Marshall circles 'Pirates'". Variety. Retrieved August 3, 2009.
 Kilday, Gregg (May 13, 2011). "Cannes Q&A: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Director Rob Marshall". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Barnes, Brooks (May 11, 2011). "New Captain for a Series Becalmed". The New York Times.
 Boucher, Geoff (September 11, 2009). "Johnny Depp (in Jack Sparrow costume) surprises Disney D23 Expo audience". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Chmielewski, Dawn C.; Eller, Claudia; Fritz, Ben (September 19, 2009). "Walt Disney Studios chief Dick Cook abruptly leaves the company". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved September 19, 2009.
 Eller, Claudia (September 18, 2009). "Johnny Depp says he's 'shocked and very sad' about Dick Cook's departure". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 DiOrio, Carl (January 6, 2010). "'Spider-Man 4' release date squeezed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Deleted/Extended Scenes. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Wordplayer.com: WORDPLAY/Archives/"We Sail With the Tide" by Terry Rossio". October 12, 2010. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Boucher, Geoff (October 6, 2009). "Surprised author Tim Powers finds himself setting sail with 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 9, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 The Latest On Pirates 4 Origins | Movies - Empire
 Weintraub, Steve (February 3, 2011). "Screenwriter Terry Rossio On Set Interview: Pirates of the Caribbean 4: On Stranger Tides". Collider. Archived from the original on November 26, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Galloway, Stephen (May 10, 2011). "The Making of 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. p. 2. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 POTC4 Presskit
 "PIRATES NO 4 NETS £33M FOR JOHNNY". The Daily Express. November 15, 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2012. Retrieved November 15, 2009.
 Ditzian, Eric (September 23, 2009). "Geoffrey Rush Says He's Planning To Shoot 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' In The Spring". MTV.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Ditzian, Eric (March 19, 2010). "Exclusive: Penelope Cruz To Play Johnny Depp's Love Interest In New 'Pirates'". MTV Movie News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 19, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Movie Interview – Bruckheimer on Pirates of the Caribbean 4". IGN. May 24, 2010. Archived from the original on July 4, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Legends of On Stranger Tides. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Damian O'Hare". Hamilton Hodell Talent Management. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 "Johnny Depp Wants Another Rolling Stone to Join Pirates of the Caribbean". The Daily Express. April 10, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Three Pirates enough for Keira". The Independent. March 22, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Wigler, Josh (January 26, 2010). "Orlando Bloom Won't Return For 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: On Stranger Tides'". MTV.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Weintraub, Steve (February 20, 2010). "Johnny Depp Provides Updates on Dark Shadows, The Tourist and Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Collider.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Bill Nighy Eager to Sail Again for 'Pirates of the Caribbean 4'". MTV. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 "Is Pirates of the Caribbean 4 in trouble? | Blastr". Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved March 3, 2017.
 Jones, Alice (February 5, 2010). "Mackenzie Crook: More than just the Office boy". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on December 24, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides production notes" (PDF). Walt Disney Pictures. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Ian McShane talks Pirates 4". Total Film. April 11, 2011. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2012.
 "La armada invencible española viaja a 'Piratas del Caribe 4'". El País (in Spanish). June 29, 2010. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2010.
 McNary, Dave (June 3, 2010). "Graham sails with 'Pirates 4' crew". Variety. Archived from the original on November 8, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Shennan, Paddy. "This is England star Stephen Graham on why he's celebrating Halloween in Liverpool this year" Archived January 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Liverpool Echo (October 22, 2010). Retrieved 2011-03-15.
 "Sam Claflin Added to Cast of Walt Disney Pictures'/Jerry Bruckheimer Films' Epic Adventure Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" (Press release). Walt Disney Pictures. April 16, 2010. Archived from the original on November 11, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Savvas, George (May 25, 2010). "New 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Cast Members Find Inspiration at Disneyland Park". Walt Disney Parks and Resorts. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved September 3, 2010.
 Rull, Carles (June 30, 2010). "Cuatro españoles en 'Piratas del Caribe 4". 20 minutos. Multiprensa & Mas S.L. Archived from the original on November 6, 2010. Retrieved January 27, 2011.
 "Óscar Jaenada, a punto de ser un 'pirata del Caribe'". El Periódico de Catalunya (in Spanish). June 10, 2011. Archived from the original on January 20, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2012.
 Collis, Clark (January 26, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides': Jerry Bruckheimer explains why you need real breasts to play a mermaid". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 15, 2011. Retrieved January 27, 2011.
 Singer, Leigh (May 17, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: Astrid Berges-Frisbey Interview". IGN. Archived from the original on August 20, 2011. Retrieved July 23, 2011.
 JMO and Elle (June 13, 2010). "Pirate tale for Gemma Ward". The Sunday Telegraph. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Under the Scene: Bringing Mermaids to Life. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 Bruckheimer, Jerry (June 14, 2010). "Announcement of initial shooting". Twitter. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 The Walt Disney Company and Affiliated Companies - Corporate Information - Archived
 "Disney open casting calls for 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' in Los Angeles". Disney Feature Film Casting. July 5, 2010. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Verrier, Richard (March 9, 2011). "Puerto Rico boosts tax incentives for bigger Hollywood role". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 Kaufman, Debra (June 29, 2011). "Behind the Lens: A look at VFX in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Creative COW Magazine. Archived from the original on August 12, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "New Pirates of the Caribbean epic to film". Pinewood Studios Group. August 2, 2010. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved August 26, 2010.
 Scott, Mike (June 10, 2010). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' spokesman lets the wind out of the sails of New Orleans fans". The Times-Picayune. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Stewart, Andrew (May 19, 2011). "Fourth try aims to stir high 'Tides' at B.O." Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 Eller, Claudia; Chmielewski, Dawn C. (May 3, 2010). "Not even Bruckheimer movies can escape budget cuts". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2010.
 Giardina, Carolyn (May 22, 2011). "The New 3D Technology Behind 'Pirates of the Caribbean'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Last Sail/First Voyage. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 Singer, Michael (2011). The Art of Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides. Disney Editions. ISBN 978-1-4231-3946-1.
 In Search of the Fountain. Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray: Walt Disney Home Entertainment. 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Cinefex. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Desowitz, Bill (May 24, 2011). "A Splash of Mermaids for Fourth 'Pirates'". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Failes, Ian (June 14, 2011). "MPC's pirates & their ships sail on Stranger Tides". fxguide. Archived from the original on September 23, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Houston, Kimberly (September 16, 2011). "INTERVIEW: PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN VFX Art Director Aaron McBride on Creating the Film's Mermaids". The Daily BLAM!. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2011.
 Desowitz, Bill (May 26, 2011). "CIS Hollywood and Method Studios Discuss On Stranger Tides". Animation World Network. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films' "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" Soundtrack Sets Sail With Oscar®-Winning Composer Hans Zimmer at the Helm With Acclaimed Guitar Duo Rodrigo y Gabriela" (Press release). Walt Disney Records. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides: Hans Zimmer Interview". MovieWeb. May 5, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved August 6, 2011.
 Schweiger, Daniel (May 6, 2011). "Audio: On The Score With Hans Zimmer". Film Music Magazine. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2011.
 Whitacre, Eric. "Pirates IV! – Blog" Archived September 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. (January 25, 2011) EricWhitacre.com Retrieved 2011-03-15.
 Masters, Kim (September 8, 2010). "Disney hires new marketing guru for "Pirates 4"". The Hollywood Reporter. Reuters. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Check out the 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Comic Con Teaser". July 24, 2010.
 "OFFICIAL Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Jack Sparrow Comic-Con 2010 Greeting". YouTube. July 29, 2010.
 Raup, Jordan (December 5, 2010). "First Footage From 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides'". The Film Stage. Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved December 5, 2010.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean Teaser Trailer with TRON: Legacy" Archived October 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ComingSoon.net. Retrieved March 15, 2011.
 Goetzel, David (December 15, 2010). "ESPN Airs 3D Ads, Movie Trailers". Media Post. Archived from the original on December 17, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Lichtig, Max (February 6, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Super Bowl Spot". Collider. Archived from the original on September 2, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 McWeeny, Drew (March 21, 2011). "Disney spills even more story details in new 'Pirates 4' trailer and stills". HitFix. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2010.
 "LEGO Group and Disney Consumer Products Announce Building Sets Inspired by Pirates of the Caribbean Films" (Press release). The LEGO Group. November 18, 2010. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 East, Thomas (April 5, 2011). "Pirates Of The Caribbean is 'perfect foundation' for a LEGO game". Computer and Video Games. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Verizon Wireless Delivers Official Mobile App For Walt Disney Pictures And Jerry Bruckheimer Films' Pirates Of The Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Verizon Wireless. May 2, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
 "Pirate's Booty Collaborates with Disney's "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides"" (Press release). Pirate Brands. May 2, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Discover a Treasure Trove of Color with New BRIGHTS by OPI, Inspired by Disney and Jerry Bruckheimer Film's Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Walt Disney Corporation. Archived from the original on January 10, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Disney and Hot Topic Present Treasure-Filled "Pirates Day" Fan Events to Celebrate Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films' "Pirates of the Caribbean: on Stranger Tides"" (Press release). Walt Disney Pictures. May 9, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "Swarovski – Swarovski's Collaboration with Disney Continues with "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides" Collection". Swarovski. December 10, 2010. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2010.
 "Goldline Coin Giveaway". Goldline International. Archived from the original on June 11, 2012. Retrieved April 28, 2011.
 Guy, Timothy (June 9, 2011). "Disney's magic undergoes changes". The Press-Enterprise. Archived from the original on November 20, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2011.
 Graser, Marc (April 27, 2011). "'Pirates' set for first Russian bow". Variety. Archived from the original on December 23, 2011. Retrieved July 29, 2011.
 Breznican, Anthony (April 13, 2011). "Johnny Depp's 'Pirates 4' headed for Cannes Film Festival". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". IGN. Archived from the original on March 17, 2011. Retrieved April 25, 2011.
 Lesnick, Silas (July 22, 2010). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Teaser Shown Read more: UPDATE: Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Teaser Shown". Coming Soon. Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". OK Magazine Australia. January 25, 2011. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 25, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides An IMAX 3D Experience". IMAX. Archived from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2011.
 Vlessing, Etan (May 17, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: on Stranger Tides' to Be Released on a Record 402 Imax Screens". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved May 18, 2011.
 Young, John (May 22, 2011). "Box office report: 'Pirates of the Caribbean' posts year's best opening with $90.1 mil". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 Segers, Frank (May 22, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Pirates' Makes $260.4 Million Overseas, Largest Offshore Debut Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved May 22, 2011.
 Blum, Matt (May 20, 2011). "9 Things Parents (and Everyone Else) Should Know About Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Wired. Retrieved May 12, 2020.
 "Exclusive Clip: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Mermaid Magic". Entertainment Tonight. July 13, 2011. Archived from the original on September 26, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 Smith, Matthew (July 14, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D". Blu-Ray.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 McCutcheon, David (July 14, 2011). "Pirates' Stranger Tides Revealed". Blu-Ray.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 Grabert, Jessica (July 15, 2011). "Disney Will Delay Pirates Of The Caribbean DVD For A Month After Blu-Ray". Cinema Blend. Archived from the original on October 17, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 "Blu-ray Sales: Strange Week on the Home Market". November 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013. Retrieved November 17, 2011.
 "Weekly Domestic Blu-ray Sales Chart for Week Ending January 1, 2012". Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides – DVD Sales". Archived from the original on August 20, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2012.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides thrills 5.4m on BBC One". Digital Spy. December 30, 2013. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2011.
 "2011 Worldwide Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved September 5, 2023.
 "WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved May 2, 2019.
 "WORLDWIDE OPENINGS". Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 22, 2011). "Box Office Report: Disney's 'Pirates' $346 million Opening Fourth Biggest Worldwide Debut Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (July 3, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Transformers: Dark of the Moon' Scores Third-Best Global Bow Ever". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 27, 2011). "Friday Box Office: 'Hangover 2' No. 1 With $30 Mil". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 2, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2011.
 Brandon, Gray (May 29, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Booty Grows, 'Hangover,' 'Panda' Sequels Open Strongly". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 3, 2011). "Box Office Report: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Sails Past $700 Mil Mark". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 19, 2011. Retrieved June 4, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 8, 2011). "'Transformers' Blowing Up Worldwide Records". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 26, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Potter' Still Magic Overseas". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 ""Pirates" treasure mounts to $1 billion worldwide". Reuters. July 2, 2011. Archived from the original on May 14, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 Corliss, Richard (May 13, 2012). "The Avengers Storms the Billion Dollar Club—in Just 19 Days". Time. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2012.
 "'Transformers' Becomes Tenth Billion-Dollar Movie Ever; 'Potter' Hits Another Worldwide Milestone". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
 "Forecast: 'Pirates' Has Some Life Left in It". Box Office Mojo. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved May 28, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (May 23, 2011). "Weekend Report: 'Pirates' Rides Smaller 'Tides'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2012.
 Young, John. "'Pirates of the Caribbean': Why didn't more American moviegoers opt to see Jack Sparrow in 3-D?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 "2011 DOMESTIC GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved August 14, 2011.
 "May Posts Record Gross". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2011.
 "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 McClintock, Pamela (June 15, 2011). "Box Office Shocker: 'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides' Is Disney's Top Film of All Time Overseas". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved June 16, 2011.
 "2011 Overseas Total Yearly Box Office Results". Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Segers, Frank (May 19, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Earns $18.5 Million Internationally". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 20, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean' Opens to $4.7 Million at Midnight Showings". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 18, 2011. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 "'Pirates' Already Making Waves Overseas". Box Office Mojo. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2011.
 "PIRATES OF THE CARIBBEAN: ON STRANGER TIDES". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
 "OVERSEAS TOTAL ALL TIME OPENINGS". Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Russia – CIS Box Office May 19–22, 2011". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". EntGroup. Archived from the original on April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014.
 "Germany Box Office May 19–22, 2011". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on November 14, 2011. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Pirates' Sails to New Overseas Record". Box Office Mojo. May 22, 2011. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 Brandon, Gray (May 31, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Booty Grows, 'Hangover,' 'Panda' Sequels Open Strongly". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 1, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (June 5, 2011). "Around-the-World Brief: 'Pirates' Out-Class 'X-Men'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2011.
 Ray, Subers (July 26, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Potter' Still Magic Overseas". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved July 31, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (May 25, 2011). "Disney's 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Hits $400 Million Worldwide in Less Than a Week". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2011.
 "RUSSIA – CIS ALL TIME OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2011.
 "UKRAINE ALL TIME OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2011.
 McClintock, Pamela (December 30, 2011). "Box Office Report: Christian Bale's 'Flowers of War' Already Top-Grossing Chinese Film of 2011". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 21, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011) – International Box Office Results". Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Russia – CIS Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Austria Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Ukraine Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Greece Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Portugal and Angola Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "South Africa (Entire Region) Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Romania Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Bulgaria Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Egypt Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Estonia Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Latvia Yearly Box Office". Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2021.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2011.
 Ebert, Roger. "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 12, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Long, Tom. "Review: Fourth 'Pirates' movie makes little sense but a lot of noise". The Detroit News. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 "Mark Kermode savages new Pirates Of The Caribbean film". BBC. May 20, 2011. Archived from the original on August 21, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2011.
 Goodykoontz, Bill (May 18, 2011). "'Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides,' 2 stars". The Arizona Republic. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Berardinelli, James (May 19, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Reelviews. Archived from the original on April 3, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Puig, Claudia (May 19, 2011). "'Pirates: On Stranger Tides' in precarious position". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 8, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Scott, Mike (May 20, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". The Times-Picayune. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Robinson, Tasha (May 19, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on August 15, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Roeper, Richard. "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". ReelzChannel. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Barker, Andrew (May 12, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides". Variety. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Bennett, Ray (May 10, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides: Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved July 9, 2011.
 Groen, Rick (May 20, 2011). "Pirates of the Caribbean 4: Ahoy me hearties, there's treasure amid the bloat". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Archived from the original on August 22, 2011. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
 Garvey, Marianne (June 29, 2011). "Teen Choice Awards Nominees Announced". E! Online. Archived from the original on July 2, 2011. Retrieved June 29, 2011.
 "The 12th Annual Golden Trailer Awards® Posts Nominations for Best Movie Promos of 2011: Live Gala Award Show Will be Held June 29 at the Music Box Theatre in L.A." Golden Trailer Awards.com. June 3, 2011. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2011.
 "2012 Movieguide Awards Winners". Movieguide Awards. February 1, 2012. Retrieved June 29, 2017.
 McWeeny, Drew (December 4, 2010). "Disney will set sail for 'Pirates of the Caribbean' 5 & 6 back-to-back". HitFix.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014.
 Fleming, Mike Jr. (January 14, 2011). "Disney Sets Terry Rossio To Script Fifth 'Pirates of the Caribbean' Installment". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2013.
 "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Is Being Rewritten; Rob Marshall May Direct". Screen Rant. January 11, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016.
 Rossio, Terry (August 7, 2016). "Wordplay/Columns/55. "Time Risk" by Terry Rossio". Wordplayer.com.
 Fleming, Mike. "'Kon-Tiki' Helmers Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg Land 'Pirates Of The Caribbean 5'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 1, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 5 Title Revealed!". August 23, 2013. Archived from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014.
 Alexander, Bryan. "'Pirates of the Caribbean' uprising: How the fans demanded Keira Knightley". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021.
 Nugent, John (June 1, 2017). "Pirates Of The Caribbean 5: Ten Revelations From Directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg". Empire. Archived from the original on March 16, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2018.
 Brzeski, Patrick (April 25, 2017). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' to World Premiere at Shanghai Disneyland". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 26, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides.
	Film portal
flag	United States portal
icon	Speculative fiction portal
icon	Fantasy portal
icon	Oceans portal
icon	2010s portal
icon	Disney portal
Official website
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at IMDb
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Box Office Mojo
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Rotten Tomatoes
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides at Metacritic Edit this at Wikidata
On Stranger Tides title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides
Authority control databases: National Edit this at Wikidata	
Czech Republic
Categories: 2011 films2011 action films2010s action adventure films2010s fantasy adventure films2011 3D filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican fantasy action filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAmerican films about revengeAmerican sequel filmsAmerican zombie films2010s fantasy action filmsFilms about mermaidsFilms based on American novelsFilms based on multiple worksFilms directed by Rob MarshallFilms produced by Jerry BruckheimerFilms scored by Hans ZimmerFilms set in LondonFilms set in SpainFilms set in 1750Films set in the 18th centuryFilms set on shipsFilms shot at Bovingdon StudiosFilms shot at Pinewood StudiosFilms shot in CaliforniaFilms shot in HawaiiFilms shot in Puerto RicoFilms with screenplays by Ted ElliottFilms with screenplays by Terry RossioIMAX filmsPirates of the Caribbean (film series) filmsFilms about treasure huntingFilms about legendary creaturesWalt Disney Pictures filmsJerry Bruckheimer Films filmsFilms about Voodoo2010s English-language films2010s American filmsCultural depictions of George II of Great BritainCultural depictions of BlackbeardEnglish-language action adventure filmsEnglish-language fantasy action filmsEnglish-language fantasy adventure films
This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 10:23 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides

63 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Plot
Cast
Production

Development
Filming
Music
Marketing
Release

Theatrical
Censorship
Home media
Reception

Box office
Critical response
Accolades
Sequel
Notes
References
External links
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End

Article
Talk
Read
View source
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
This is a good article. Click here for more information.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
This article is about the film. For the video game, see Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (video game). For the soundtrack, see Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (soundtrack).
Pirates of the Caribbean:
At World's End

Theatrical release poster
Directed by	Gore Verbinski
Written by	
Ted Elliott
Terry Rossio
Based on	
Characters
by Ted Elliott
    Terry Rossio
    Stuart Beattie
    Jay Wolpert
Walt Disney's Pirates of the Caribbean
Produced by	Jerry Bruckheimer
Starring	
Johnny Depp
Orlando Bloom
Keira Knightley
Stellan Skarsgård
Bill Nighy
Chow Yun-fat
Geoffrey Rush
Jack Davenport
Kevin R. McNally
Jonathan Pryce
Cinematography	Dariusz Wolski
Edited by	
Craig Wood
Stephen Rivkin
Music by	Hans Zimmer
Production
companies	
Walt Disney Pictures
Jerry Bruckheimer Films
Distributed by	Buena Vista Pictures Distribution
Release dates	
May 19, 2007 (Disneyland Resort)
May 25, 2007 (United States)
Running time	168 minutes[1]
Country	United States
Language	English
Budget	$300 million[2]
Box office	$963.4 million[2]
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End is a 2007 American epic fantasy swashbuckler film directed by Gore Verbinski, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer, and written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio. The direct sequel to Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2006), it is the third installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series, and follows an urgent quest to locate and save Captain Jack Sparrow (Johnny Depp), trapped on a sea of sand in Davy Jones' Locker, and convene the Brethren Court in a war against the East India Trading Company. In an uneasy alliance, Will Turner (Orlando Bloom), Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley), Hector Barbossa (Geoffrey Rush), and the Black Pearl crew rescue Jack and prepare to fight Lord Cutler Beckett, who controls Davy Jones and the Flying Dutchman.

Two sequels to Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl were conceived in 2004, with Elliott and Rossio developing a story arc that would span both films. The film was shot in two shoots during 2005 and 2006, the former of which was released as Dead Man's Chest. This also marks the final film of the series to be directed by Verbinski. With a production budget of US$300 million, it was the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release.

At World's End premiered at the Disneyland Resort on May 19, 2007, then theatrically released in the United States on May 25. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but was the highest-grossing film of 2007, bringing in over $963 million. It was nominated at the 80th Academy Awards for Best Makeup and Best Visual Effects, and won Favorite Movie Actor for Depp at the 2008 Kids' Choice Awards. A standalone sequel, On Stranger Tides, was released in 2011. Dead Men Tell No Tales, released in 2017, followed as a direct continuation of At World's End.

Plot
Now in control of the oceans, Lord Cutler Beckett executes anyone associated with piracy in Port Royal and orders Davy Jones to destroy all pirate ships, also forcing him to kill the Kraken. Condemned prisoners sing Hoist the Colours to compel nine Pirate Lords from around the world to convene at Shipwreck Cove to hold the Brethren Court and address the threat Beckett poses. Because Pirate Lord Jack Sparrow never named a successor before being dragged to Davy Jones' Locker,[a] Hector Barbossa, Will Turner, Elizabeth Swann, Tia Dalma, and the surviving crew of the Black Pearl plot to rescue him. In Singapore, the crew meet Pirate Lord Sao Feng, who owns navigational charts to the Locker before they are attacked by the East India Trading Company. During the battle, Will secretly promises to give Jack to Feng in return for the Pearl, intending to use it to rescue his father "Bootstrap Bill" Turner from the Flying Dutchman.

The crew crosses over into the Locker, rescues Jack and recovers the Pearl. While departing, they encounter boats of dead souls, including Elizabeth's father Governor Swann, executed by Beckett. The goddess Calypso charged Davy Jones with guiding the souls of those who died at sea to the next world; every ten years he could come ashore to be with the woman he loved, but after his lover never arrived to meet him, Jones corrupted his purpose and cursed himself to become a monster. Whoever kills Jones by stabbing his disembodied heart must become the Dutchman's captain.

Returning to the living world, the Pearl stops at an island for fresh water, but the crew is attacked by Sao Feng and Beckett's men. As Jack secretly negotiates his freedom with Beckett, Elizabeth is handed over to Feng, who believes she is Calypso, while the rest of the crew make for Shipwreck Cove aboard the Pearl. Jack throws Will off the ship as part of a plan to seize control of the Dutchman. Sao Feng tells Elizabeth that the first Brethren Court bound Calypso in human form after her lover, Davy Jones, betrayed her; Feng plans to release her to defeat Beckett. Feng is wounded in an attack by Jones, appointing Elizabeth his successor as Pirate Lord before dying. Elizabeth and the crew are locked in the brig of the Dutchman, where she finds Bootstrap Bill losing himself to the Dutchman's curse. Admiral James Norrington frees Elizabeth and her crew from the Dutchman, but is killed by a crazed Bootstrap Bill.

Will is rescued by Beckett and informs Jones of Jack's escape from the Locker, learning in the process that Jones enabled the first Court to imprison Calypso, revealed to be Tia Dalma. The Pearl arrives at Shipwreck Cove, where Barbossa attempts to persuade the Brethren Court to release Calypso while Elizabeth demands they fight back against Beckett. The Keeper of the Code, Captain Teague,[b] informs the Court that only an elected Pirate King can declare war. To avoid a stalemate, Jack votes for Elizabeth, making her King. Elizabeth, Jack, Barbossa, Beckett, Jones, and Will parley, trading Will for Jack. Barbossa frees Calypso, but when Will reveals Jones' betrayal to her, Calypso vanishes and summons a maelstrom, refusing to help either side.

The Pearl and Dutchman battle in the maelstrom. During the battle, Elizabeth and Will are wed by Barbossa. On the Dutchman, Jack and Jones duel for control of Jones' heart. After Jones mortally wounds Will, Jack helps Will stab the heart, killing Jones. Jack and Elizabeth escape the Dutchman, which sinks into the maelstrom. As Beckett's ship, the Endeavour, engages the Pearl, the Dutchman rises from the sea, now captained by Will and its crew freed from Jones' curse. The two pirate ships destroy the Endeavour, killing Beckett, while his armada retreats. With Will bound to guide souls lost at sea to the next world, he and Elizabeth bid farewell to each other. Will departs on the Dutchman, leaving Elizabeth pregnant and with the chest containing his heart. Barbossa steals the Pearl again to find the Fountain of Youth, but finds that Jack has stolen Feng's charts. Jack departs from Tortuga on a small boat to track the fountain down.

In a post-credits scene, ten years later, Elizabeth and her son[c] watch Will return aboard the Dutchman.

Cast
Main articles: List of Pirates of the Caribbean cast members and characters
Johnny Depp as Captain Jack Sparrow: Sparrow and the Black Pearl have been dragged to Davy Jones' Locker by the Kraken; he is trapped there until his former crew mounts a rescue party. He is the Pirate Lord of the Caribbean Sea.
Keira Knightley as Elizabeth Swann: Governor Swann's daughter and Will Turner's fiancée. Having tricked Jack Sparrow into being swallowed by the Kraken to save herself and the Black Pearl crew, she subsequently goes to his rescue. Swann becomes Captain of The Empress and Pirate Lord of the South China Sea as successor to Feng, and becomes the Pirate King by default as a result of the Bretheren Court vote.
Orlando Bloom as Will Turner: A young blacksmith-turned-pirate, the son of "Bootstrap Bill" Turner, and later the husband of Elizabeth Swann. Turner becomes Captain of The Flying Dutchman after the ritual is performed to save his life.
Stellan Skarsgård as Bootstrap Bill Turner: Will's father, cursed to serve an eternity aboard Davy Jones' ship The Flying Dutchman. As he slowly loses hope, he also loses his humanity to the ship, and becomes mentally confused, barely recognizing his own son in the second half of the film.
Bill Nighy as Davy Jones: Malevolent ruler of the ocean realm, Captain of The Flying Dutchman. With his heart captured by James Norrington, he is now enslaved to Cutler Beckett who commanded him to kill the Kraken ("your pet"), and now serves the East India Trading Company, though he remains volatile and makes life difficult for the soldiers policing him.
Chow Yun-fat as Sao Feng: Pirate Lord of the South China Sea, he captains the Chinese ship The Empress and has a poor history with Sparrow. He is reluctant to aid in his rescue from Davy Jones' Locker. "Sao Feng" (嘯風) means "Howling Wind" in Chinese. Chow was confirmed to be playing Feng in July 2005 while production of the second film was on hiatus.[5] Chow relished playing the role, even helping out crew members with props.[6]
Geoffrey Rush as Hector Barbossa: Once first mate of the Black Pearl under Jack's command before leading a mutiny, Barbossa has been resurrected by Tia Dalma to captain the rescue of Jack Sparrow. He was also needed for his "piece of eight" to free Calypso. Rush said that in the film, Barbossa becomes more of a cunning politician.[7][8] He is the Pirate Lord of the Caspian Sea.
Jack Davenport as James Norrington: Promoted to the rank of admiral in return for giving Beckett Jones' heart, he has allied himself with Beckett and the Company, although he still cares for Elizabeth, his former fiancée, and finds himself torn between his duty and his growing dislike for Beckett.
Kevin R. McNally as Joshamee Gibbs: Jack's loyal, if superstitious, first mate.
Naomie Harris as Tia Dalma/Calypso: An obeah witch who travels with the Black Pearl crew to rescue Jack; she also raised Barbossa from the dead at the conclusion of Dead Man's Chest and has a mysterious past connection to Davy Jones.
Tom Hollander as Cutler Beckett: A powerful chairman of the East India Trading Company and now armed with a mandate from the King and in possession of Davy Jones' heart, Beckett attempts to control the world's oceans for the sake of sustainable business—and to end piracy.
Jonathan Pryce as Weatherby Swann: Governor of Port Royal and father to Elizabeth Swann, he is now trapped in Beckett's service.
Lee Arenberg and Mackenzie Crook as Pintel and Ragetti: A mischievous and eccentric duo, part of Jack's crew.
David Bailie as Cotton: Jack's loyal mute crewman who returns again to join the quest to bring back Sparrow.
Martin Klebba as Marty: Jack's dwarf crewman who also joins the quest to bring back Sparrow.
Keith Richards as Captain Teague: Pirate Lord of Madagascar, Keeper of the Pirata Codex for the Brethren Court and Jack Sparrow's father.[b] The other pirate lords are visibly terrified of him. Richards, who partially inspired Depp's portrayal of Sparrow,[9] was first rumored to have a role as Sparrow's father in 2004,[3] and later reported in 2006.[4] He was meant to appear in Dead Man's Chest, but there was no room for him in the story,[10] as well as his being tied up with a Rolling Stones tour. He almost missed filming a scene in At World's End, following injuries sustained by falling out of a tree.[11] In June 2006, Verbinski finally managed to make room in Richards' schedule to shoot that September.[12]
David Schofield as Mr. Mercer: Lord Beckett's henchman, assigned to hold Davy Jones' leash aboard the Dutchman.
Greg Ellis as Theodore Groves: The second-in-command to Lord Beckett.
Lauren Maher and Vanessa Branch as Scarlett and Giselle
Angus Barnett and Giles New as Mullroy and Murtogg
Reggie Lee as Tai Huang
Ghassan Massoud as Captain Ammand, the Pirate Lord of the Black Sea
Marcel Iureș as Capitaine Chevalle, the Pirate Lord of the Mediterranean Sea
Sergio Calderón as Captain Eduardo Villanueva, Pirate Lord of the Adriatic Sea
Takayo Fischer as Mistress Ching, the Pirate Lord of the Pacific Ocean
Hakeem Kae-Kazim as Gentleman Jocard, the Pirate Lord of the Atlantic Ocean
Marshall Manesh as Sri Sumbhajee, Pirate Lord of the Indian Ocean
Dominic Scott Kay as young Henry Turner, the son of Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann. Scott Kay was credited as young Will Turner, and was retroactively named young Henry Turner following the release of Dead Men Tell No Tales.
Production
Development
See also: Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest – Production
"I felt it important that the third film was the end of an era — like in a postmodern western where the railroad comes and the gunfighter is extinct. It seemed that we had an opportunity to take a look at a world where the legitimate has become corrupt and there is no place for honest thieves in that society, so you have darker issues and a little melancholy. The myths are dying. That seemed a great theme with which to complete the trilogy."

—Gore Verbinski[13]
Following The Curse of the Black Pearl's success in 2003, the cast and crew signed on for two sequels to be shot back-to-back.[14] For the third film, director Gore Verbinski wanted to return the tone to that of a character piece after using the second film to keep the plot moving.[6] Inspired by the real-life confederation of pirates, Elliott and Rossio looked at historical figures and created fictional characters from them to expand the scope beyond the main cast.[15] Finally embellishing their mythology, Calypso was introduced, going full circle to Barbossa's mention of "heathen gods" that created the curse in the first film.[16]

Filming
Parts of the third film were shot during location filming of Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, a long shoot which finished on March 1, 2006.[17][8] During August 2005, the Singapore sequence was shot. The set was built on Stage 12 of the Universal Studios backlot, and comprised 40 structures within an 80 by 130-foot (24 by 40-m) tank that was 3+1⁄2 feet (1.1 m) deep. As 18th century Singapore is not a well-documented era, the filmmakers chose to use an Expressionist style based on Chinese and Malaysian cities of the same period. The design of the city was also intended by Verbinski to parody spa culture, with fungi growing throughout the set. Continuing this natural feel, the floorboards of Sao Feng's bathhouse had to be cut by hand, and real humidity was created by the combination of gallons of water and the lighting equipment on the set.[18][8]

Filming resumed on August 3, 2006, at the Bonneville Salt Flats in Utah[19] for 70 days off the California coast, as all the shooting required in the Caribbean had been conducted in 2005.[20] Davy Jones' Locker was shot at Utah, and it was shot in a monochromatic way to represent its different feeling from the usual colorful environment of a pirate.[21] The climactic battle was shot in a former air hangar at Palmdale, California,[22] where the cast had to wear wetsuits underneath their costumes on angle-tipped ships. The water-drenched set was kept in freezing temperatures, to make sure bacteria did not come inside and infect the crew.[23] A second unit was shot at Niagara Falls.[24] Industrial Light & Magic did 750 effects shots, while Digital Domain also took on 300. They spent just five months finishing the special effects. The film posed numerous challenges in creating water-based effects.[25]

Filming finished on December 12, 2006, in Molokai,[26][8] and the first assembly cut was three hours.[27] Twenty minutes were removed, not including end credits, though producer Jerry Bruckheimer maintained that the long running time was needed to make the final battle work in terms of build-up.[28]

Music
Main article: Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (soundtrack)
Hans Zimmer composed the score, as he did for the previous films. Zimmer composed eight new motifs, including a new love theme for the At World's End soundtrack.[26][8] He scored scenes as the editors began work, so as to influence their choice of cutting to the music. Gore Verbinski helped on the score. He played the Ennio Morricone-influenced guitar music in the parley scene between Barbossa, Sparrow, Elizabeth and Will, Davy Jones, and Cutler Beckett.[29] He also co-wrote the song "Hoist the Colours" with Zimmer.[30]

Marketing
After a muted publicity campaign, the trailer finally debuted at ShoWest 2007.[31] It was shown on March 18, 2007, at a special screening of Pirates of the Caribbean: The Curse of the Black Pearl named "Pirates Ultimate Fan Event", and was then shown on March 19 during Dancing with the Stars, before it debuted online.[32] Action figures by NECA were released in late April.[33] Board games such as a Collector's Edition Chess Set, a Monopoly Game, and a Pirates Dice Game (Liar's Dice) were also released. Master Replicas made sculptures of characters and replicas of jewellery and the Dead Man's Chest.[34] A video game with the same title as the film was released on May 22, 2007, on Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Wii, PSP, PlayStation 2, PC, and Nintendo DS formats.[35] The PS3 and Xbox 360 versions of the game featured the "Story of Davy Jones and Calypso", which detailed the backstory of Davy Jones and Calypso, and the curse of the Flying Dutchman, where it was stated that the Captain of the Dutchman would be freed by finding a love that was true.[36]

The soundtrack and its remix were also released on May 22.

Release
Theatrical

Keith Richards, who plays Jack's father Captain Teague, at the premiere.
The world premiere of At World's End was held on May 18, 2007, at Disneyland, home of the ride that inspired the film and where the first two films in the trilogy debuted. Disneyland offered the general public a chance to attend the premiere through the sale of tickets, priced at $1,500 per ticket, with proceeds going to the Make-a-Wish Foundation charity.[37] Just a few weeks before the film's release, Walt Disney Pictures decided to move the United States opening of At World's End from screenings Friday, May 18, 2007, to Thursday at 8 pm, May 17, 2007.[38] The film opened in 4,362 theaters on May 25, 2007, beating Spider-Man 3's theater opening record by 110 (this record was surpassed by The Dark Knight the following year).[39][40]

Censorship
At least one nation's official censors ordered scenes cut from the film. According to Xinhua, the state news agency of the People's Republic of China, ten minutes of footage containing Chow Yun-fat's portrayal of Singaporean pirate Sao Feng were trimmed from versions of the film which may be shown in China. Chow is onscreen for twenty minutes in the uncensored theatrical release of the film. No official reason for the censorship was given, but unofficial sources within China have indicated that the character gave a negative and stereotypical portrayal of Chinese people.[41]

Home media
The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 19, 2007, in the United Kingdom and December 4, 2007, in the United States and Canada. The 2-Disc Limited Edition DVD was in continuous circulation until it stopped on September 30, 2008. In contrast, the Blu-ray Disc release, containing all of the features from the 2-Disc DVD version (including some original scenes from the theatrical release, but excluding the writer's commentary) is still widely available. The initial Blu-ray Disc release was misprinted on the back of the box as 1080i, although Disney confirmed it to be 1080p. Disney decided not to recall the misprinted units, but to fix the error on subsequent printings.[42] DVD sales brought in $296,043,871 in revenue, marking the best-selling DVD of 2007, although it ranks second in terms of units sold (14,505,271) behind Transformers (16,234,195).[43] At World's End had its television premiere in the UK on Boxing Day 2009 on BBC One at 19:30,[44][45] and was watched by 6.06 million viewers.[46]

Reception
Box office
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End earned $309.4 million in North America and $654 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $963.4 million.[2] It is the highest-grossing film of 2007[47] and the third-highest-grossing film in the Pirates of the Caribbean series.[48] Compared to its predecessor, it grossed far less at the North American box office, but more outside North America. Still, its worldwide earnings are more than $100 million below Dead Man's Chest's.[49] During its worldwide opening weekend, it grossed $344 million, making it the seventh-largest opening.[50]

North America
At World's End was released in a then-record 4,362 theaters in North America,[51] and was shown on around 11,500 screens, which is still an all-time record.[52] On its first three-day weekend, it earned $114.7 million. It set a Memorial Day 4-day weekend record ($139.8 million), which it held until the release of Top Gun: Maverick, another film produced by Bruckheimer in 2022.[53] This record was previously held by X-Men: The Last Stand.[54] Including Thursday night previews, as well, At World's End earned $153 million in 5 days,[55] and is the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2007.[56] Among May's Big Three (Spider-Man 3, Shrek 3 and Pirates 3),[57][58] Pirates 3 grossed the least both during its opening weekend[59] and in total earnings.[60] However, this was mainly attributed to the fact that it was released third, after the other two films, so there was already too much competition.[61] It is also the second-highest-grossing film in the Pirates series.[48]

Other territories
It is the eighteenth-highest-grossing film, the sixth-largest film distributed by Disney,[62] and the second-highest-grossing Pirates of the Caribbean film.[48] During its opening weekend, it grossed an estimated $216 million, which stands as the sixth biggest opening outside North America.[63] It set opening-weekend records in South Korea with $16.7 million (surpassed by Transformers: Dark of the Moon),[64] Russia, and the CIS with $14 million (first surpassed by Samy luchshiy film),[65] and Spain with $11.9 million[66] (surpassed by The Impossible).[67] It dominated for three consecutive weekends at the box office outside North America.[68] By June 12, 2007, its 20th day of release, the film had grossed $500 million, breaking Spider-Man 3's record for reaching that amount the fastest.[69] This record was first overtaken by Avatar (15 days to $500 million).[70] Its highest-grossing countries after North America are Japan, where it earned $91.1 million, and became the last Hollywood film to earn more than 10 billion yen before Avatar,[71] and the UK, Ireland, Malta ($81.4 million), and Germany ($59.4 million).[72]

Critical response
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End has an approval rating of 43% based on 226 reviews, with an average rating of 5.4/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "POTC: AWE provides the thrilling action scenes, but mixes in too many characters with too many incomprehensible plot threads."[73] At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating to reviews, the film received an average score of 50 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[74] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A−" on an A+ to F scale.[75]

Drew McWeeny praised the film's complexity as giving it repeat-viewing value, and its conclusion as "perhaps the most canny move it makes."[76] Todd Gilchrist found the story too similar to other cinematic trilogies such as Star Wars, but praised the production values.[77] Brian Lowry felt that "unlike last year's bloated sequel, it at least possesses some semblance of a destination, making it slightly more coherent – if no less numbing during the protracted finale."[78] Total Film praised the performances but complained that the twists and exposition made it hard to care for the characters.[79] Edward Douglas liked the film but had issues with its pacing,[80] while Blake Wright criticized the Davy Jones' Locker and Calypso segments.[81] James Berardinelli found it the weakest of the trilogy as "the last hour offers adventure as rousing as anything provided in either of the previous installments... which doesn't account for the other 108 minutes of this gorged, self-indulgent, and uneven production."[82] Peter Travers praised Richards and Rush but felt "there can indeed be too much of a good thing," regarding Depp's character.[83] Travers later declared the movie to be one of the worst films of the year.[84] Colm Andrew of the Manx Independent said the film was overall a disappointment and that "the final showdown ... is a non-event and the repetitive swordplay and inane plot contrivances simply become boring by the end".[85] Richard Roeper gave a positive review, saying "Gore Verbinski and the stunt and special effects crews have created one of the most impressive blends of live-action work and CGI wizardry ever put on film," and believing it "rarely drags and is almost always entertaining." He praised the performances of the actors as one of the best things about the film.[86]

Chow Yun-fat's character stirred controversy with the Chinese press. Perry Lam, of Hong Kong cultural magazine Muse, found an offensive resemblance between Chow's character and Fu Manchu: "Now Fu Manchu has returned after an absence of 27 years in the Hollywood cinema; except that, in a nod to political correctness and marketing realities, he is no longer called Fu Manchu."[87]

Accolades
See also: List of accolades received by the Pirates of the Caribbean
At the 80th Academy Awards, Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End was nominated for two awards, Best Makeup and Best Visual Effects.

At the 2008 MTV Movie Awards, the film was nominated for three awards, including one win: the Best Comedic Performance (Johnny Depp). At the 34th People's Choice Awards, it was nominated for five awards, including four wins: Favorite Movie, Favorite Threequel, Favorite Male Movie Star (Johnny Depp) and Favorite Female Action Star (Keira Knightley).[88] Also, at the Teen Choice Awards it won five awards, out of six nominations. Finally, at the 2008 Kids' Choice Awards, it achieved three nominations but won only the Favorite Movie Actor award (Johnny Depp). However, Orlando Bloom was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Supporting Actor.

Sequel
Disney continued the Pirates of the Caribbean franchise with Johnny Depp as Jack Sparrow, Geoffrey Rush as Hector Barbossa, and Kevin McNally as Joshamee Gibbs in stand-alone sequels, beginning with On Stranger Tides in 2011. Since 2007, Orlando Bloom and Keira Knightley stated they didn't want to return as Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann, with Bloom noting the closure in At World's End, as well as both actors having been repeatedly quoted in saying they wanted to move on from the Pirates franchise by 2010.[89][90] While Knightley affirmed this over the years,[91][92] Bloom made statements about returning as early as October 2011;[93] eventually being announced to return in Dead Men Tell No Tales.[94] Once the film was shown to test audiences, the filmmakers felt they were "demanded" to reunite both Will and Elizabeth's characters.[95]

Notes
 As depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest
 While it wasn't stated in the film beyond reports and rumors,[3][4] Teague was later confirmed to be Jack Sparrow's dad in Pirates of the Caribbean: On Stranger Tides (2011).
 Credited as "Young Will Turner" in this film, but never named onscreen. Later retroactively named "Henry" as depicted in Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (2017).
References
 "Pirates of the Caribbean – At World's End". British Board of Film Classification. May 9, 2007. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved February 7, 2015.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 11, 2009. Retrieved March 27, 2011.
 "Keith Richards is the Father Figure of the Week". Entertainment Weekly.
 "Keith Richards to Play Pirate Pop - CBS News". CBS News. July 5, 2006.
 Brian Linder (July 7, 2005). "Chow Down for Pirates 3". IGN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007.
 Ian Nathan (April 27, 2007). "Pirates 3". Empire. pp. 88–92.
 "Chapter 3 – Revealing the True Nature of all the Characters". Production Notes. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 "Movies" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on August 21, 2010.
 "Depp & Bruckheimer Talk Pirates". Archived from the original on January 2, 2008. Retrieved November 10, 2010.
 "Depp talks Pirates 2". Archived from the original on May 24, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2010.
 "Keith Richards 'tree fall' injury". BBC News Online. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
 "Keith Richards – Richards To Shoot Pirates Role In September". June 29, 2006. Archived from the original on June 24, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2010.
 Ian Berriman (November 13, 2007). "Gore Verbinski on Pirates of the Caribbean 3". SFX magazine. Archived from the original on November 15, 2007. Retrieved November 12, 2007.
 Brian Linder (October 21, 2003). "Back-to-Back Pirates". IGN. Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2007.
 "Pirate Lords". Walt Disney Pictures. 2007. Archived from the original on July 2, 2007. Retrieved May 15, 2007.
 Scott Holleran (May 31, 2007). "Interview: Ted Elliott & Terry Rossio on 'At World's End'". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 8, 2007.
 "Chapter 7 – Return to The Bahamas". Production Notes. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 "Singapore Sling". Production Notes. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 "Captain Jack Sparrow Landed In Utah Last Week". KSL News. August 9, 2006. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2006.
 Jeff Otto (June 28, 2006). "Pirates 3 Production Details". IGN. Archived from the original on January 2, 2007. Retrieved October 30, 2006.
 Noah Kadner (June 2007). "All Hands On Deck". American Cinematographer. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2007.
 Josh Rottenburg. "Days of Plunder". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 16, 2007. Retrieved May 11, 2007.
 Sam Ashurst (May 14, 2007). "Orlando and Keira: Uncut!". Total Film. Archived from the original on June 9, 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 "Third Pirates filmed at Niagara Falls". ComingSoon.net. October 30, 2006. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2006.
 Bill Desowitz (June 7, 2007). "ILM Meets the Maelstrom on the Third Pirates". VFXWorld. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2016.
 "Aloha Oe: Hawaii Farewell". Production Notes. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2007.
 "Exclusive Interview: Terry Rossio". Moviehole.net. February 12, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved May 14, 2009.
 "Exclusive Interview: Jerry Bruckheimer". Moviehole.net. May 21, 2007. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved October 6, 2016.
 The Pirate Maestro: The Music of Hans Zimmer (DVD). Buena Vista. 2007.
 Hoist the Colors (DVD). Buena Vista. 2007.
 Edward Douglas (March 13, 2007). "Disney Kicks Off ShoWest Opening Ceremony". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on March 16, 2007. Retrieved March 13, 2007.
 Walt Disney Pictures (March 9, 2007). "Pirates Trailer to Debut March 19!". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved March 9, 2007.
 Nisha Gopalan (February 9, 2007). "First Look! Toy Fair '07". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved February 9, 2007.
 Edward Douglas (February 13, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean at Toy Fair '07!". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2007.
 Disney Interactive Studios (March 19, 2007). "Pirates to Set Sail on Consoles and Handhelds". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved March 19, 2007.
 Eurocom (May 22, 2007). Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (video game) (PlayStation 3, Xbox 360). Disney Interactive Studios. Now, because of that love, Davy Jones agreed to set foot on dry land once every ten years. And if this love was true to him, his task would be complete, and a new Captain of the Dutchman would be found.
 The Disneyland Report (April 13, 2007). "Disneyland announces sale of Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End premiere tickets". DisneylandReport.com. Archived from the original on March 21, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2007.
 Dave McNary (May 8, 2007). "Disney moves up 'Pirates' opening". Variety. Archived from the original on May 10, 2007. Retrieved May 11, 2007.
 "Pirates Opens in Record # of Theaters". ComingSoon.net. May 24, 2007. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved May 25, 2007.
 Carl DiOrio (July 16, 2008). "High expectations for 'Dark Knight'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 19, 2008. Retrieved July 17, 2008.
 "China gives bald pirate the chop". Associated Press. June 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 18, 2007. Retrieved June 15, 2006.
 "Pirates Packaging Misprint". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on February 25, 2012. Retrieved December 15, 2007.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". The-Numbers.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2007.
 "BBC One - Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2014.
 "600 hours of TV repeats to be shown over Christmas - Telegraph". December 2, 2009. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014. Retrieved December 20, 2014.
 NEIL WILKES (December 29, 2009). "Tennant's 'Hamlet' seen by 896,000". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015.
 "2007 WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2014.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean Movies at the Box Office". Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2014.
 "'Pirates' Vs. 'Pirates'". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2011.
 "WORLDWIDE OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (May 29, 2007). "Third 'Pirates' Sacks Memorial Record". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (July 13, 2011). "'Harry Potter' Already Breaking Records". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2011.
 D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 31, 2022). "'Top Gun: Maverick' Scorches 'Pirates Of The Caribbean: At World's End' For Memorial Day Opening Record With $160M+ – Tuesday AM Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 31, 2022.
 "All Time Memorial Day Holiday Weekends". Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2014.
 "Third 'Pirates' Sacks Memorial Record". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2010.
 "2007 DOMESTIC GROSSES". Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2014.
 Bowles, Scott (March 8, 2007). "Film franchises set to do battle". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2014.
 "Will 'X-Men', 'How To Train Your Dragon 2', Or 'Transformers' Become The First $100 Million Opener Of 2014?". BoxOffice Media. May 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 25, 2014.
 "2007 OPENING GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 "Monthly Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 Gray, Brandon (May 29, 2007). "Third 'Pirates' Sacks Memorial Record". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 "WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2014.
 "OVERSEAS TOTAL ALL TIME OPENINGS". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 Subers, Ray (July 5, 2011). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Transformers' Lays Waste to World". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2012.
 Bresnan, Conor (February 2, 2008). "Around the World Roundup: 'Sweeney Todd,' Russian Movie Lead". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved July 4, 2012.
 Bresnan, Conor (May 30, 2007). "Around the World Roundup: 'At World's End' Massive in Beginning". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved February 4, 2012.
 Subers, Ray (October 16, 2012). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Taken 2' Crushes Predecessor, 'Ted' Sets New Record". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012.
 "Overseas Total Box Office Index for 2007". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 Dave McNary (June 13, 2007). "'Pirates' tops $500 million overseas". Variety. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved June 14, 2007.
 "Overseas Total Box Office Index". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on September 8, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011.
 Blair, Gavin (May 24, 2010). "'Alice' gets to 10 bil yen faster than 'Avatar'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved April 22, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End (2007) – International Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Amazon.com. Archived from the original on May 15, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on May 30, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2025.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2010.
 "CinemaScore". Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved December 23, 2018.
 Drew McWeeny (May 24, 2007). "Moriarty Sets Sail With PIRATES 3: AT WORLD'S END!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on September 27, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Todd Gilchrist (May 24, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". IGN. Archived from the original on August 11, 2007. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Brian Lowry (May 23, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Variety. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 "Pirates Of The Caribbean: At World's End". Total Film. Archived from the original on May 24, 2007. Retrieved May 14, 2009.
 Edward Douglas (May 24, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 Blake Wright (May 24, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2007.
 James Berardinelli (2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Reelviews. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 Peter Travers (May 22, 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009. Retrieved May 23, 2007.
 Travers, Peter (December 19, 2007). "Peter Travers' Best and Worst Movies of 2007". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 23, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2007.
 "Review by Colm Andrew". IOM Today. Retrieved March 27, 2011.
 "Pirates of the Caribbean 3: At World's End (2007; Rated )". Archived from the original on December 6, 2014.
 Lam, Perry (June 2007). "Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End". Muse Magazine (5): 73.
 "The People's Choice Awards Winners!". ComingSoon.net. January 9, 2008. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved January 9, 2008.
 Orlando Bloom Says He's All Done With 'Pirates,' 'Lord Of The Rings' - MTV
 Orlando Bloom 'turns down Pirates 4' - Movies News - Digital Spy
 Three Pirates enough for Keira - Independent.ie
 "Even Johnny Depp couldn't convince Keira Knightley to do another "Pirates of the Caribbean"". Uproxx.com. September 12, 2011. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017.
 Orlando Bloom would love to go back to Pirates of the Caribbean - Daily Star
 Zumberge, Marianne (February 18, 2015). "'Pirates of the Caribbean 5' Begins Production in Australia". Variety. Archived from the original on April 24, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2017.
 Alexander, Bryan. "'Pirates of the Caribbean' uprising: How the fans demanded Keira Knightley". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End.
Official website Edit this at Wikidata
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End at IMDb
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End at Metacritic Edit this at Wikidata
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End at Box Office Mojo
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End at Rotten Tomatoes
Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End
Authority control databases Edit this at Wikidata
Portals:
 Film
flag United States
icon Speculative fiction
icon Fantasy
icon Disney
icon Oceans
 2000s
Categories: 2007 films2000s action adventure films2000s English-language films2000s fantasy action films2000s fantasy adventure films2000s American filmsAmerican action adventure filmsAmerican epic filmsAmerican fantasy action filmsAmerican fantasy adventure filmsAmerican sequel filmsDemons in filmEnglish-language action adventure filmsEnglish-language fantasy action filmsEnglish-language fantasy adventure filmsFilms about VoodooFilms directed by Gore VerbinskiFilms produced by Jerry BruckheimerFilms scored by Hans ZimmerFilms set in SingaporeFilms set in the 1720sFilms set in the CaribbeanFilms set on shipsFilms shot in CaliforniaFilms shot in HawaiiFilms shot in UtahFilms shot in the BahamasFilms with screenplays by Ted ElliottFilms with screenplays by Terry RossioFilms set in the 18th centuryFilms using motion captureFlying DutchmanJerry Bruckheimer Films filmsKraken in popular cultureNickelodeon Kids' Choice Award–winning filmsPirates of the Caribbean (film series) filmsTeen Choice Award winning filmsWalt Disney Pictures films
This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 20:39 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End

71 languages
Add topic


WikipediaThe Free Encyclopedia
Search Wikipedia
Search
Donate
Create account
Log in

Contents hide
(Top)
Origins
Plot
Books

Supplementary works

Reception
In other media

Related series

See also
References
External links
Percy Jackson & the Olympians

Article
Talk
Read
Edit
View history

Tools
Appearance hide
Text

Small

Standard

Large
Width

Standard

Wide
Color (beta)

Automatic

Light

Dark
Checked
Page protected with pending changes
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
"Percy Jackson and the Olympians" redirects here. For the TV series, see Percy Jackson and the Olympians (TV series). For other uses, see Percy Jackson (disambiguation).
Percy Jackson & the Olympians

Logo of the series
Original Series
The Lightning Thief (2005)
The Sea of Monsters (2006)
The Titan's Curse (2007)
The Battle of the Labyrinth (2008)
The Last Olympian (2009)
The Senior Year Adventures
The Chalice of the Gods (2023)
Wrath of the Triple Goddess (2024)
Author	Rick Riordan
Cover artist	John Rocco (books 1-5)
Victo Ngai (book 6-7)
Country	United States
Language	English
Genre	Fantasy, romance, Coming Of Age
Publisher	Disney Hyperion (US)
Miramax Books (US, first edition)
Published	June 28, 2005 – May 5, 2009; September 23, 2023–present
Media type	Print (hardcover and paperback), audiobook, e-book
No. of books	7
Followed by	The Heroes of Olympus
Percy Jackson & the Olympians is a fantasy novel series by American author Rick Riordan. The first book series in his Camp Half-Blood Chronicles, the novels are set in a world with the Greek gods in the 21st century. The series follows the protagonist, Percy Jackson, a young demigod who must prevent the Titans, led by Kronos, from destroying the world.

The first three books were published in the United States by Miramax Books before they were folded into Hyperion Books; that house published the remaining books. All the books were published in the United Kingdom by Penguin Books. Four supplementary books, along with graphic novel versions of the first five books, have also been released. By January 2022, the books had sold more than 180 million copies worldwide, making the series one of the best-selling of all time.[1] Two sequel series, The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo, follow. A follow-up trilogy in the series, The Senior Year Adventures, takes place after the events of The Heroes of Olympus and began in 2023 with The Chalice of the Gods.

The first book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010). It was commercially successful but received mixed reviews from critics and the audience for its departure from the book. The first book was also adapted into a musical. The second book was adapted as a film titled Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters (2013), which also received mixed reviews. A TV series based on the novels premiered on Disney+ in 2023 to positive reviews.

Origins

Riordan at the Texas Book Festival in November 2007, doing publicity for Book 4
Rick Riordan has said that the development of these novels began when he was telling bedtime stories to his son, Haley Riordan. Haley had been diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia.[2] Haley had been studying Greek mythology in second grade and asked his father to tell him stories based on Greek myths. When Riordan ran out of myths, his son suggested that he make up new stories based on the gods.

Riordan created the fictional character of Percy Jackson and a story about his traveling across the United States to recover Zeus's lightning bolt. Haley suggested his dad should make it a book, and Riordan wrote what became known as The Lightning Thief over the next year.[3]

After submitting his manuscript to his agent and editor, Riordan presented the book to a group of sixth, seventh, and eighth graders for their reactions. He gained their approval and, with their help, came up with the book title and the way Percy's sword works.[4] In 2004, the book was sold to Miramax Books for enough money that Riordan could quit his job and focus on writing full-time.[5] After it was published in 2005, it sold more than 1.2 million copies. The book was released in multiple editions, including hardcover, paperback, and audio editions.[6][7] It has been translated into multiple languages and published internationally.[8]

Plot
The original series is set in the mid-2000s and follows Perseus "Percy" Jackson, a 12-year-old boy who learns he is the son of the Greek god Poseidon. Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades had sworn not to father any more children after World War II, and as such, Poseidon did not interact with him as a child. The gods took that pledge because their children were too strong and had the potential to cause immense slaughter (in the universe's continuity, World War II was a conflict among their offspring). When Percy learns that he is at risk of being found by ferocious monsters because of his demigod status and strength, he also learns that Camp Half-Blood, a training facility on Long Island, New York, houses more demigods like him. He journeys with a new friend, Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena, and his best friend and traveling companion, Grover Underwood, a satyr who is his guardian. As the threat posed by the Titans grows, Percy begins to complete remarkable tasks, fulfill predictions, and engage in combat with and for the gods. He realizes that he can either contribute to the world's destruction or preservation.

Books
Original series
The Lightning Thief
Main article: The Lightning Thief
The Lightning Thief is the first book in the series and was released on June 28, 2005.

When Percy Jackson comes home for summer vacation, he and his mother, Sally Jackson, travel to their cabin in Montauk to escape Percy's stepdad, Gabe Ugliano. However, the trip is cut short after a series of harrowing incidents, including an attack by the Minotaur, resulting in his mother's disappearance. Percy finds himself at Camp Half-Blood, a training camp for demigods, and discovers that he too is a demigod, son of Poseidon, the Greek god of the sea. Percy also learns that his best friend, Grover Underwood, is actually a satyr, and that Zeus suspects Percy has stolen his Master Bolt, the most powerful weapon in the universe. To clear his name, save the world from another war between the Olympian gods, and possibly save his mother whose soul was collected by Hades, Percy sets out to retrieve the lightning bolt from Hades, who may be the real thief, after hearing a prophecy from an Oracle of Delphi at Camp Half-Blood. Percy, Grover, and Annabeth Chase, a daughter of Athena, start on a journey to the underworld, facing numerous mythological monsters on the way. Their underworld visit does not go as planned, and they realise that Hades himself had his helmet of darkness (symbol of his power) stolen. After confronting an innocent Hades, they learn that their friend Luke Castellan, son of Hermes, is the real thief who stole the lightning bolt to allow Kronos, the defeated King of the Titans from the past, a chance to rise again and that Ares, the Greek god of war, had been manipulated by Kronos and helped cover up Luke's crime to instigate a war between Olympians. Percy barely holds off Ares in a head-to-head fight which was interrupted by Kronos, who wants Percy alive for his future plans. Percy confronts Luke at Camp Half Blood, which ends with Percy barely surviving Luke's attack, and Luke escaping. At summer's end, Percy returns home to find his mother back from Hades' realm as an expression of gratitude.

The book was adapted into a film by 20th Century Fox under the title Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief (2010), which was directed by Chris Columbus. Riordan did not endorse the film.[9]

The Sea of Monsters
Main article: The Sea of Monsters
The Sea of Monsters is the second novel in the series and was released on April 1, 2006.

Camp Half-Blood is under attack when Thalia's tree, which guards the borders of the camp against monsters, is poisoned and slowly begins to die. The camp activities director has been replaced. To save the tree and the camp, someone must recover the Golden Fleece, which is located somewhere in the Sea of Monsters (the Bermuda Triangle). At the same time, Percy learns that Grover, who has left on a quest to find Pan, has been captured by the Cyclops Polyphemus, and that the Fleece is on the Cyclops's island. Percy sets out to rescue Grover with Annabeth and his Cyclops half-brother Tyson, even though Tantalus, who had replaced Chiron as the camp's activities director, has prohibited him from doing so. Meanwhile, Ares' daughter Clarisse La Rue is sent on an official quest by Camp Half-Blood to retrieve the Fleece. The trip to the Sea of Monsters is long and hazardous, and along the way, the heroes encounter several dangers including Scylla and Charybdis, the sorceress Circe, the Sirens, and their former friend Luke Castellan. Percy also learns of a prophecy from the Oracle of Delphi: A child of one of "the Big Three" most important gods (Zeus, Poseidon, and Hades) will play a vital part in the success or failure of resurrecting Kronos the Titan-King and saving Olympus. Following the encounter with Luke, the heroes eventually retrieve the Fleece and restore Thalia's tree, unknowingly resurrecting Thalia, daughter of Zeus. She had been turned into the tree by her father after she sacrificed herself so Annabeth and Luke could get safely to Camp Half-Blood six years prior.

The book was adapted into a film by 20th Century Fox under the title Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters (2013), which was directed by Thor Freudenthal. Riordan did not approve of the film's screenplay, which differed from the book's plot.[9]

The Titan's Curse
Main article: The Titan's Curse
The Titan's Curse is the third novel in the series, released on May 1, 2007.

On a mission to rescue the half-bloods Bianca and Nico di Angelo; Percy, Annabeth, Thalia and Grover are attacked by a Manticore. They are rescued by the goddess Artemis but Annabeth is captured. Later, Artemis is captured by Luke's army while hunting for the Ophiotaurus, a cow serpent. A prophecy said that it would cause the downfall of Olympus when its entrails were sacrificed. Artemis's lieutenant Zoë Nightshade, daughter of Atlas and a sister of the Hesperides, leads Bianca (now a Hunter of Artemis), Thalia, and Grover on a quest to save her. Percy follows them on behalf of Nico di Angelo, promising to try to protect Nico's sister Bianca, as he also tries to find Annabeth. The others eventually encounter Percy, and he joins their group.

The group are chased across the country by many monsters, including the Nemean Lion and skeleton warriors. Bianca kills a skeleton, leaving the others mystified, and hinting at her godly parentage, her father Hades. Bianca sets off a trap as they make their way across a godly mechanical dump guarded by Talos, a giant automaton guarding the junkyard. She later dies sacrificing herself to save the others; Percy could not save her as she was destined to die as part of the quest’s prophecy recited by the Oracle of Delphi. They find Annabeth with Luke and Artemis, holding up the sky. Percy then takes it from Artemis, and they trick Atlas into his original position under the sky. Thalia replaces Zoë, who dies saving Artemis, as Artemis' lieutenant. Thalia's induction as a lieutenant of Artemis ensures that she will become immortal, never aging to reach 16, thus escaping the Great Prophecy and leaving Percy to fulfill it. They return to camp and Percy informs Nico about Bianca's death during the journey. Nico blames Percy for failing to protect her and runs away, only after causing skeletal warriors invading the camp to fall into the dark void of the Underworld, thus alerting Percy to the fact that Hades is Nico and Bianca's father.

The Battle of the Labyrinth
Main article: The Battle of the Labyrinth
The Battle of the Labyrinth, the fourth installment in the series, was released on May 6, 2008.

Percy, Annabeth, Grover, and Tyson venture on a quest to find Daedalus's workshop within the labyrinth, which Luke Castellan and his army are looking for too, with the help of Ariadne's string. A swordsman named Quintus is subbing for Mr. D as Camp Half-Blood's director, since Mr. D is on a mission to get the minor gods to be on the gods' side of the war. The questers go on a journey inside the labyrinth, facing many monsters. They eventually discover a forge belonging to the god Hephaestus being used by Kronos's smiths. To escape, Percy triggers a volcanic eruption that puts him in a coma.

Percy awakes on the island Ogygia, being tended by the immortal Calypso. He eventually returns to his friends and recruits Rachel Elizabeth Dare, a mortal he encountered in the previous book, to navigate the labyrinth. With Rachel's help, the group finds Daedalus's workshop, where they find out that Quintus is Daedalus. Daedalus betrays them and sells them out to Luke, and the questers flee back to camp. Luke's army follows them and a battle ensues. The demigods win but suffer many casualties including Daedalus, Castor, and Lee Fletcher. After the battle, they prepare for the oncoming war against Lord Kronos, who has possessed the body of Luke Castellan and who has risen to obliterate Olympus.

The Last Olympian
Main article: The Last Olympian
The Last Olympian, the fifth in the series, was released on May 5, 2009.

Percy Jackson learns that Kronos' forces are preparing to attack Olympus. Poseidon, Percy's father, decides that it is time for Percy to learn what exactly the Great Prophecy means. Seeking a way to defeat Kronos, Nico di Angelo tells Percy his plan, though Percy does not like it. Percy bathes in the River Styx, making his body invulnerable except one small chosen part of his body (his Achilles' heel, in his case the small of his back). Kronos leads a siege of New York City and puts its mortal citizens to sleep. Percy leads the campers, Hunters, nature spirits, and centaurs to protect Mount Olympus from Kronos and his forces. While they protect Olympus, the gods battle the monster Typhon as he makes his way across the country to New York. Kronos, possessing Luke's body, forces his way into Olympus and battles Percy in Olympus' throne room. Typhon reaches New York but is defeated after the arrival of Poseidon's forces, led by Tyson.

Annabeth is able to help Luke overcome Kronos, and Percy gives Annabeth's knife (which is the cursed blade mentioned in the prophecy) to Luke. Luke, who has also bathed in the River Styx to host Kronos, stabs himself in his armpit, his "Achilles’ heel", to destroy Kronos and save Mount Olympus, dying heroically. The gods reward Percy and his friends and offer him immortality. Percy rejects the offer but instead requests for the gods to claim all their children and to have cabins for all the gods, including the minor ones. Rachel Elizabeth Dare becomes Apollo's next Oracle, breaking Hades' curse on the position, and recites the next Great Prophecy. The book finishes with Percy and Annabeth becoming a couple, and ominous clouds looming over Rachel's next Great Prophecy. The story is continued in sequel series The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo.

The Senior Year Adventures
The Chalice of the Gods
Main article: The Chalice of the Gods
The Chalice of the Gods, the sixth installment in the series, was released on September 26, 2023. It was announced in October 2022 as a standalone novel taking place between the events of The Heroes of Olympus and The Trials of Apollo.[10]

Percy Jackson is informed by his father Poseidon that, because he was never supposed to exist due to the pact, he is ineligible to attend New Rome University. However, Zeus has agreed to allow Percy to attend on the condition that he complete three new quests for the gods and get letters of recommendation from each god. Poseidon helps Percy to put an ad out for his services while assigning Eudora, a nereid, to be Percy's school guidance counselor as further assistance. Percy's girlfriend, Annabeth Chase, and his best friend Grover Underwood volunteer to help Percy complete the quests.

Zeus' cup-bearer Ganymede responds to the advertisement, needing help because his chalice of immortality has been stolen and Ganymede needs to recover it before the other gods find out. Percy and his friends investigate Hebe and Iris as potential suspects, and are forced to work around Percy's school schedule. Although both are cleared of any wrongdoing, in exchange for the three cleansing her magical staff, Iris uncovers the true culprit as Geras, the god of old age, and helps Percy, Annabeth and Grover to locate him. Percy challenges Geras to a wrestling match to the death, but ultimately wins by embracing Geras and in effect, old age and everything that comes with mortality, winning Geras' respect and the return of the chalice.

However, Percy, Annabeth and Grover get a distress call from Ganymede that Zeus is holding a sudden brunch for his mother Rhea, meaning that Ganymede needs the chalice back immediately. With the assistance of Grover, Annabeth's cap of invisibility, and Zeus' kitchen staff, Percy sneaks into Zeus's palace where he gets Ganymede alone with the unexpected help of Athena and returns the chalice to him just in time. Ganymede gives Percy a magical piece of paper on which Percy, his pregnant mother Sally, his stepfather Paul and Annabeth dictate his first recommendation letter. Poseidon reassures Percy that he's always watching over him and tells Percy that his small act of heroism in helping Ganymede proves Percy to be a true hero more than any of his world-saving quests did as Percy had kept his promise to the god and challenged Geras not to save the world or to get the letter in the end, but because it's who he is. Percy and Annabeth make plans for their future together and to get the rest of the letters that Percy will need to secure his entrance into college.

Wrath of the Triple Goddess
Main article: Wrath of the Triple Goddess
Wrath of the Triple Goddess, the seventh installment in the series, was released on September 24, 2024.[11]

Supplementary works
The Demigod Files
Main article: The Demigod Files
The Demigod Files, also written by Rick Riordan, is the first companion book to the series. It was released February 10, 2009, featuring three short stories, interviews with the campers, puzzles and pictures.[12] It is set between The Battle of the Labyrinth and The Last Olympian.[13] The book received mixed reviews, with some reviewers criticizing the lack of substantial material and others commenting on the writing of the short stories. The stories are "Percy Jackson and the Stolen Chariot", "Percy Jackson and the Bronze Dragon", "The Camper Interviews", and "Percy Jackson and the Sword of Hades". At the end of the book, there are portraits on the characters of the series. [13]

Percy Jackson's Greek Gods
Main article: Percy Jackson's Greek Gods
Percy Jackson's Greek Gods is a companion book to the series. It reads as a comprehensive guide to the different Greek gods.[14]

The Ultimate Guide
The Ultimate Guide is a companion book, second to the series, released on January 19, 2010. This book has a magnetic cover and holographic character pictures that change into four different characters. Its 156 pages include trading cards, full-color diagrams, and maps.[15] It also includes a dictionary of almost every monster Percy faces in the series, with pictures beside some, as well as various activities. The book tells of Percy Jackson's starting life as a half-blood, a tour of the Underworld by Nico di Angelo, the story of Sally Jackson's parents, and items used throughout the series. There is also a paperback version.

Graphic novels
Graphic novels based on each book of the series have been released: The Lightning Thief on October 12, 2010, The Sea of Monsters on July 2, 2013, The Titan's Curse on October 8, 2013, The Battle of the Labyrinth on October 2, 2018, and The Last Olympian on August 13, 2019.[16]

Demigods and Monsters
Demigods and Monsters is an unofficial companion book and was released on February 11, 2009.[17] With an introduction by Riordan, it features essays written by various young adult authors that explore, discuss and provide further insight into the Percy Jackson series. At 196 pages, it also contains information on the places and characters of the series, as well as a glossary of Greek myths.[18]

The Demigod Diaries
Main article: The Demigod Diaries
The Demigod Diaries contains four new stories with character interviews, illustrations of characters and more, puzzles, and a quiz. The four stories include the adventures of Thalia, Luke, and Annabeth, and others that precede the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series and a first-person narrative from Percy's viewpoint. Set a month after the events of The Last Olympian and before he goes missing in The Lost Hero, Percy and Annabeth retrieve Hermes' stolen staff. One of the stories is written by Riordan's son, Haley, and revolves around one of the demigods who fought for Kronos during the Second Titan War and survived the battle in Manhattan. The Demigod Diaries also contains a story involving Jason, Leo, and Piper that recounts their time spent at Camp Half-Blood between The Lost Hero and The Mark of Athena.

Reception
The Lightning Thief received mostly positive reviews and won awards including the School Library Journal Best Book of 2005.[19] The New York Times praised The Lightning Thief as "perfectly paced, with electrifying moments chasing each other like heartbeats".[20] Author Rick Riordan said of the various awards, "The ultimate compliment for a children's writer is when the kids like it."[21]

Like its predecessor, The Sea of Monsters won several prizes and received generally positive reviews as well.[22][23] It sold over 100,000 copies in hardcover by the time it was released in paperback[24] and reviewers have praised the storyline, themes and the author's style of writing.[25][26][27] Matt Berman, of Common Sense Media, praised the book, saying "The Percy Jackson series continues to be pure fun, with the author doing nearly everything right to produce a book that few kids will be able to resist."[26] Kirkus reviewed The Battle of the Labyrinth as, "This volume can stand alone, but no one will be able to read just one [...] look no further for the next Harry Potter, meet Percy Jackson as legions of fans already have." As of December 11, 2019, it has been on the New York Times Children's Series Best Seller List for 665 weeks.

Some critics, especially Christian critics, of Riordan have disapproved of the emphasis on pagan gods in his books. Riordan responds to these complaints by reminding his readers that first and foremost,[28]

The Lightning Thief explores Greek mythology in a modern setting, but it does so as a humorous work of fantasy. I'm certainly not interested in changing or contradicting anyone's religious beliefs. Early in the book, the character Chiron makes a distinction between God, capital-G, the creator of the universe, and the Greek gods. Chiron says he does not want to delve into the issue of God, but he has no qualms about discussing the Olympians because they are a "much smaller matter".

Critics such as The Calico Critic have also disagreed with the fusion of Greek mythology and modern American culture. They have stated that it is difficult to believe "the reality of the tale", claiming that "monsters in the St. Louis Arch" and "the entrance to Olympus in New York" were unimaginable, despite Riordan's explanations of why he chose these certain locations.[29]

In other media
Films
Main article: Percy Jackson (film series)
Chris Columbus directed and produced Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief for 20th Century Fox through 1492 Pictures.[30][31] The film was released February 2, 2010. Columbus has stated that he was drawn to directing the Percy Jackson movie because it gave him the "opportunity to do a movie that we haven't really seen before for this generation. When I was a kid, there were movies that dealt with Greek mythology, which in terms of visual effects was really primitive. So I thought this was an opportunity to deal with Greek mythology which children and adults all over the world are fascinated by and it was not a new genre but a new avenue, dealing with mythological creatures in a contemporary setting."

The second film in the series, Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters,[32] was released on August 7, 2013.[33] A third film, Percy Jackson: Titan's Curse, was in development but never went into production.

Video game
A video game based on the film adaption of The Lightning Thief developed by Activision was released exclusively for Nintendo DS on February 11, 2010.[34] GameZone's Michael Splechta gave it a 6/10, saying "Percy Jackson might not make a splash when it comes to movie tie-in games, but fans of turn-based combat might find some redeeming qualities in this otherwise bare-bones game."[35] On Metacritic, the game has a score of 56 out of 100 based on 6 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[36]

Musical
Main article: The Lightning Thief (musical)
On January 12, 2017, A Series of Unfortunate Events story editor Joe Tracz wrote a musical adaptation of The Lightning Thief.[37] The musical debuted off-Broadway in 2017, before going on a national tour in 2019, followed by a 16-week limited run on Broadway from October 2019 to January 2020.[38] It was nominated for three Drama Desk Awards in 2017, including a nomination for Outstanding Musical.[39]

Television series
Main article: Percy Jackson and the Olympians (TV series)
The rights to the Percy Jackson novels were transferred to Disney following its acquisition of 21st Century Fox in 2019.[40] In May 2020, Riordan announced that Disney would be producing a live-action television series following the story of the series, with the first season adapting The Lightning Thief. Riordan also confirmed that he, along with his wife Becky, would be involved in the development of the series, a significant departure from the film series, in which Riordan was mostly shut out of the filmmaking process.[41] The series was greenlit in January 2022,[42] began production in June 2022,[43] and premiered on Disney+ on December 19, 2023.[44] Percy Jackson and the Olympians, a Disney+ series, premiered on December 19, 2023, and has been renewed for Season 2, which will adapt The Sea of Monsters.[45] Rick Riordan released two new books, The Chalice of the Gods (2023) and Wrath of the Triple Goddess (2024), continuing Percy's story.[46] Additionally, Courtney B. Vance will play Zeus in Season 2, replacing Lance Reddick, while Andra Day and Tamara Smart have been cast as Athena and Thalia Grace, respectively.[47]

Related series
Sequel series
The Heroes of Olympus
Main article: The Heroes of Olympus
The Heroes of Olympus is a sequel series, also based on Camp Half-Blood and Greek mythology and introduces Camp Jupiter and its associated Roman mythology. The first book The Lost Hero was released on October 12, 2010. Like the first series, there are five books.[48]

The second book in The Heroes of Olympus, The Son of Neptune, was released in October 2011. The third book, The Mark of Athena, was released on October 2, 2012. The fourth book, The House of Hades, was released on October 8, 2013. The fifth and final book of The Heroes of Olympus series, The Blood of Olympus, was released on October 7, 2014.[49]

The Trials of Apollo
Main article: The Trials of Apollo
Riordan's follow up series to The Heroes of Olympus book series is titled The Trials of Apollo. It is written from the point of view of Apollo, having been cast down from Olympus by Zeus. The first installment, titled The Hidden Oracle, was released on May 3, 2016.[50] The second book titled The Dark Prophecy was released in May 2017.[51] The third book titled The Burning Maze was released on May 1, 2018.[52] The fourth book of the series, The Tyrant's Tomb, was released on September 24, 2019.[53] The fifth and last book of the pentalogy, The Tower of Nero, was released on October 6, 2020.[54]

Other series
The Kane Chronicles
Main article: The Kane Chronicles
The novels are set within the same fictional universe as the three previous book series, and are narrated alternately in first-person by the two protagonist-siblings Carter and Sadie Kane. The siblings are descended from the two pharaohs Narmer and Ramses the Great and are powerful magicians. They and their friends are forced to contend with Egyptian gods and goddesses who still interact with the real world. The series includes a trilogy consisting of The Red Pyramid (2010), The Throne of Fire (2011), and The Serpent's Shadow (2012), as well as three crossover books with the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series.

Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard
Main article: Magnus Chase and the Gods of Asgard
The main protagonist Magnus Chase, son of the Vanir god of fertility Frey, narrates the novel in first person. He has a relationship with Alex Fierro, another main character, and his Valkyrie is Samirah al-Abbas, a daughter of Loki. He is also the cousin of Annabeth Chase, a main character in the Percy Jackson and the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus series, who links the two series together.[55] The series consists of three books: The Sword of Summer (2015), The Hammer of Thor (2016), and The Ship of the Dead (2017).

See also
	Children's literature portal
	Mythology portal
icon	Novels portal
List of artistic depictions of dyslexia
Muses in popular culture
From the Files of the Time Rangers – also based on the premise of Greek gods active in modern-day United States
Myth-o-Mania - children's book series depicting modern twists on Greek mythology
Olympians (Marvel Comics)/Thor (Marvel Comics) – comics based on the same premise, with both Greek and Norse gods.
References
 "Disney+ Has Ordered A Thrilling Quest Based On "Percy Jackson And The Olympians," The Internationally Best-Selling Book Series By Rick Riordan, To Go Into Production This Summer". Disney+. January 25, 2022. Archived from the original on December 20, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2024.
 Williams, Sally (February 8, 2010). "Percy Jackson: My Boy's Own Adventure". The Guardian. Retrieved May 27, 2015.
 Riordan, Rick (5 April 2016). "Frequently Asked Questions". rickriordan.com. Disney-Hyperion. Retrieved November 14, 2016.
 Riordan, Rick. "An Interview With Rick". p. 1. Archived from the original on October 17, 2010. Retrieved April 8, 2013.
 Rich, Motho (September 1, 2008). "Author of Book Series Sends on a Web Treasure Hunt". The New York Times. p. 1. Retrieved May 17, 2009.
 "Hyperion: Percy Jackson". Hyperion Books. Archived from the original on February 27, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
 "Jesse Bernstein". IMDb. Retrieved February 26, 2010.
 Mabe, Chauncey (May 14, 2009). "Rick Riordan: Percy Jackson vs. Harry Potter". Sun Sentinel. p. 1. Retrieved May 18, 2009.
 Laudenbach, Sarah (2023-03-18). "Percy Jackson Author Details The Damage Movies Had On His Family". ScreenRant. Retrieved 2023-12-20.
 Jones |, Michael M. "Rick Riordan to Return to Percy Jackson Next Fall". PublishersWeekly.com. Retrieved 2022-10-19.
 Esters, Katherine (2023-09-28). "Rick Riordan Announces The Upcoming Release of A New 'Percy Jackson' Book". The Messenger. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved 2024-01-25.
 "The Demigod Files". October 5, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2010.
 "The Demigod Files (Percy Jackson and the Olympians Series)". barnesandnoble.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2009. Retrieved October 18, 2009.
 "Percy Jackson's Greek Gods". Rick Riordan. 18 April 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2024.
 Riordan, Rick (January 18, 2010). The Percy Jackson and the Olympians: Ultimate Guide (Hardcover). Hyperion Book CH. ISBN 978-1423121718.
 "Rick Riordan". Retrieved August 14, 2015.
 Riordan, Rick; Wilson, Leah (February 2009). Demigods and Monsters: Your Favorite Authors on Rick Riordan's Percy Jackson and the Olympians Series (Paperback). BenBella Books. ISBN 978-1933771830.
 "Demigods and Monsters". Myth & Mystery. March 28, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2010.
 Trevelyn Jones; Luann Toth; Marlene Charnizon; Daryl Grabarek; Joy Fleishhacker (December 1, 2005). "Best Books 2005". School Library Journal. p. 1. Archived from the original on April 22, 2010. Retrieved May 4, 2009.
 Shulman, Polly (November 13, 2005). "Harry Who?". The New York Times. Retrieved May 4, 2009.
 Minzesheimer, Bob (January 18, 2006). "'Lightning' strikes with young readers". USA Today. Retrieved 2009-05-26.
 "Mark Twain Award Previous Winners". Missouri Association of School Librarians. Archived from the original on September 21, 2008. Retrieved May 27, 2009.
 Ruth, Sheila. "The Sea of Monsters". Wands and Worlds. Archived from the original on October 29, 2009. Retrieved September 1, 2009.
 Nawotka, Edward (April 23, 2007). "Son of Poseidon Gaining Strength". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on November 28, 2009. Retrieved September 1, 2009.
 Piehl, Norah. "Kidsreads.com – The Sea of Monsters". Kidsreads.com. Retrieved September 20, 2009.
 "The Sea of Monsters review". Matt Berman. Common Sense Media. April 16, 2009. Retrieved September 20, 2009.
 "The Sea of Monsters: Percy Jackson and the Olympians, Book 2. (Brief article) (Children's review) (Audiobook review)". School Library Journal. October 1, 2006. Retrieved September 20, 2009.
 "An Interview with Rick". www.rickriordan.com. Retrieved March 10, 2016.
 Mugijatna, Mugijatna; Habsari, Sri Kusumo; Putri, Yunita Ariani (December 2014). "Rick Riordan's Intention in Writing Percy Jackson and the Lightning Thief and the Reception of the Readers". K@ta. 16 (2). doi:10.9744/kata.16.2.77-86.
 Brodesser, Claude (June 23, 2004). "'Lightning Thief' strikes Maverick". Variety. Archived from the original on April 30, 2009. Retrieved May 15, 2020.
 Gilstrap, Peter (April 17, 2007). "Columbus struck by 'Lightning'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 24, 2009. Retrieved May 15, 2020.
 McClintock, Pamela (October 12, 2011). "Fox Moves Ahead With New 'Die Hard' and 'Percy Jackson & the Olympians' Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 30, 2012.
 "Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Sea of Monsters Moved up to August 7". comingsoon.net. April 6, 2013. Retrieved April 24, 2013.
 "Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief for DS - Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief Nintendo DS - Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief DS Game". Gamespot.com. Retrieved 2010-05-07.
 Splechta, Michael. "Percy Jackson & The Olympians: The Lightning Thief Review". GameZone.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2010. Retrieved February 26, 2010.
 "Percy Jackson and the Olympians: The Lightning Thief Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved July 18, 2013.
 Cox, Gordon. "'Percy Jackson' Musical, by 'Unfortunate Events' Writer, Expands for Return Run". Variety. Los Angeles, California: Michelle Sobrino. Retrieved January 12, 2017.
 Clement, Olivia (December 17, 2019). "The Lightning Thief to Head on Tour Post-Broadway". Playbill. Retrieved 2021-04-27.
 "The Lightning Thief". Concord Theatricals. Retrieved March 31, 2022.
 Rought, Karen (December 1, 2019). "'Percy Jackson' reboot may happen at Disney, according to Rick Riordan". Hypable. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022.
 Andreeva, Nellie; Petski, Denise (May 14, 2020). "'Percy Jackson' Series In The Works At Disney+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 14, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2022.
 White, Peter (January 25, 2022). "'Percy Jackson & The Olympians' Lands Official Series Order At Disney+". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 25, 2022.
 Otterson, Joe (June 2, 2022). "'Percy Jackson' Disney+ Series Adds Five to Cast, Including Megan Mullally and Jason Mantzoukas (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved June 2, 2022.
 Hailu, Selome (August 18, 2023). "'Percy Jackson' Teaser Gives First Look at Greek Gods and Monsters, Reveals Disney+ Premiere Date". Variety. Retrieved August 18, 2023.
 Cite error: The named reference PJO-TV was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
 Cite error: The named reference PJO-Books was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
 Cite error: The named reference EW was invoked but never defined (see the help page).
 The Heroes of Olympus, Book One: The Lost Hero. This book is about Percy Jackson gets lost, It's up to Leo, Piper, and Jason to find him. (9781423113393): Rick Riordan: Books. September 9, 2009. ISBN 978-1423113393.
 "The Blood of Olympus". Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2016.
 "The Hidden Oracle (The Trials of Apollo, #1)".
 "Trials of Apollo: The Dark Prophecy release date, synopsis". 5 May 2016.
 "The Trials of Apollo | Rick Riordan".
 "The Tyrant's Tomb | Rick Riordan". 13 December 2018.
 "The Tower of Nero | Rick Riordan". 15 February 2020.
 "Magnus Chase!". Blogspot.com. Rick Riordan. Retrieved November 2, 2015.
External links

Wikiquote has quotations related to Percy Jackson & the Olympians.
Percy Jackson and the Olympians series site from publisher Disney (readriordan.com)
Rick Riordan Myth Master at publisher Penguin Books (UK)
Percy Jackson & the Olympians official Persian-language website percy-jackson.ir (archived 2010)
Teacher's Guide at Educational Resources from Rick Riordan (rickriordan.com)
Rick Riordan at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database
vte
Works by Rick Riordan
Camp Half-Blood
Chronicles	
Percy Jackson &
the Olympians	
Original series	
The Lightning ThiefThe Sea of MonstersThe Titan's CurseThe Battle of the LabyrinthThe Last Olympian
The Senior Year Adventures	
The Chalice of the GodsWrath of the Triple Goddess
The Heroes of Olympus	
The Lost HeroThe Son of NeptuneThe Mark of AthenaThe House of HadesThe Blood of Olympus
The Trials of Apollo	
The Hidden OracleThe Dark ProphecyThe Burning MazeThe Tyrant's TombThe Tower of Nero
Standalone novels	
The Sun and the Star
Supplementary books	
The Demigod FilesThe Ultimate GuideThe Demigod DiariesPercy Jackson's Greek GodsPercy Jackson's Greek HeroesCamp Half-Blood Confidential
Adaptations	
Percy Jackson film series	
The Lightning Thief soundtrackSea of Monsters soundtrack
Others	
The Lightning Thief (musical)Percy Jackson and the Olympians (TV series)
The Kane Chronicles	
The Red PyramidThe Throne of FireThe Serpent's Shadow
Magnus Chase and
the Gods of Asgard	
Main books	
The Sword of SummerThe Hammer of ThorThe Ship of the Dead
Supplementary books	
Hotel Valhalla: Guide to the Norse Worlds9 From the Nine Worlds
Short stories	
"The Son of Sobek""The Staff of Serapis""The Crown of Ptolemy"
Other books	
Big Red TequilaThe Maze of BonesVespers RisingDaughter of the Deep
Characters	
Alex FierroCarter KanePercy Jackson
See also	
Rick Riordan Presents
Categories: American bildungsromansBook series introduced in 2005Fiction about dyslexiaPentalogiesPercy Jackson & the OlympiansYoung adult novel seriesYoung adult fantasy novels
This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 13:28 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaCode of ConductDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile view
Wikimedia Foundation
Powered by MediaWiki

Percy Jackson & the Olympians

38 languages
Add topic
